Road to Solo Driving
April 2023

Authorised and published by the Secretary to the Department of
Transport and Planning, 1 Spring Street, Melbourne Victoria 3000
© Department of Transport and Planning [2023]
First published 2000
Updated March 2023
National Library of Australia cataloguing-in-publication data:
Roads Corporation.
Road to Solo Driving:
Learning to drive – driving to learn includes index.
ISBN 0 7311 9000 9
1. Automobile driver education – Victoria – Handbooks, manuals, etc.
2. Traffic regulations – Victoria – Handbooks, manuals, etc.
3. Traffic safety – Victoria – Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Roads Corporation (Vic)
343.9450946
Several organisations have contributed to the preparation of this
handbook, and their help is gratefully acknowledged.

Road laws and legal requirements
Road laws change from time to time. It is your responsibility to ensure
that you have the most recent edition of this handbook which you can
check by visiting vicroads.vic.gov.au If you are in doubt, check with
any of the VicRoads Customer Service Centres listed on the inside
back cover.
This handbook sets out many of the legal requirements for drivers.
It is intended as a guide only. It does not set out in full all of the
requirements of the law.
You will need to consult the appropriate Acts and Regulations
if you want a complete knowledge of the road law. Remember
that ignorance of what the law says on a particular subject is not
accepted as an excuse by the courts. Victorian legislation can
be found at legislation.vic.gov.au
Most things in this handbook apply to drivers. Motorcycle riders
should also refer to the Victorian Rider Handbook for further
information. Bus and heavy vehicle drivers should refer to the
Victorian Bus and Truck Driver Handbook for further information.
Much of the information in the Road to Solo Driving also applies
to pedal cyclists.
The term driver is generally used to cover different road users
and simplify the language. It does not mean that one group is
more important than the other.

The Road to Solo Driving is the first of a series of handbooks.
When you become a learner driver you can choose to use the
myLearners app or you will receive a copy of the Learner Kit.
If you choose the myLearners app, you will be given a handout
on how to download the app to record your 120 hours of driving.
More information and top tips for lifelong safe driving behaviours
can be found at myLearners.vic.gov.au.
If you received the The Learner Kit, it includes:

The Guide for Learners helps you structure your driving practice
and keep track of your progress as you work towards your Ps.
The Guide for Learners includes the Learner Log Book that
you must use to show you have gained at least 120 hours driving
practice to get a licence, if you are under 21 years of age at the
time of your licence test. The Guide for Learners and the
Learner Log Book will help you make the most of your
minimum 120 hours of driving experience and help you to become
a safer driver.

Introduction

The Road to Solo Driving handbook is designed to help you
understand the road rules, know your legal responsibilities and
prepare you for the challenges of driving. The learner permit test
questions are based on this handbook. You will also need to know
the information in the Road to Solo Driving to pass your drive
test to get your licence.

The Guide for Supervising Drivers booklet explains how your
supervising driver can help you right through your learner period.
The Victorian Government is committed to improving road safety.
The Road to Solo Driving is one of the important initiatives that
help to do this.

• the Guide for Learners (with the Learner Log Book)
• the Guide for Supervising Drivers.

Contents
How to use this book

Welcome to the Road to Solo Driving
How to use this handbook
The licensing journey
The 10 steps to getting your licence
Key points

1 The challenges of driving

Driving is not that easy
Some facts about new solo driving

2 Learning to drive

Hazard perception
Practice is the best way
Your supervising driver is there to help
Put variety into your driving practice
Getting confident
Checking your progress

3 Managing risk

Alcohol and drugs
Speed
Mobile phones and other electronic devices
Passengers
Other distractions
Fatigue
Seatbelts
Vehicle safety
Vehicle maintenance
Keys to reducing your risk of a crash
Driving and the environment

4 Rules and responsibilities

Alcohol
Drugs, medicine and driving
Seatbelts
Speed limits

Traffic controls at intersections
Give Way rules
Police direction
Turning
Freeways
Driving safely in tunnels
Sharing the road safely
– Cooperative driving
– Keeping your cool when driving
– Sharing the road with other motorists
– Using emergency signals
– How to overtake safely
– Sharing the road with pedestrians
– Sharing the road with bicycle riders & motorcyclists
– Sharing the road with trams
– Sharing the road with buses
– Sharing the road with police & emergency vehicles
– Sharing the road with trucks & other heavy vehicles
– Sharing the road with animals
Railway level crossings

Rules and responsibilities (cont.)

Parking
Penalties
Legal responsibilities
Crash responsibilities
Assisting victims following motorcycle accidents

Contents

Rules and responsibilities (cont.)

Test yourself questions
Resources to help you
Index

Welcome
This handbook will help you if you are going for a learner
permit, a probationary licence, or converting an interstate or
overseas licence to a Victorian licence.
The aim of this handbook is to help you:
•
•
•
•

prepare for the challenges of driving
find out how you will learn to drive
manage and reduce your risks as a new driver
understand the rules and responsibilities of driving.

The Road to Solo Driving will help make all this information
a bit clearer. Your learner permit test will be based on the
information in this book. You will also need this information
to pass your drive test and get your probationary licence.
New drivers are three times more likely to be involved in
casualty crashes than more experienced drivers. Learning
the information in the Road to Solo Driving is the first step
to becoming a safer driver. Reading this handbook alone
won’t make you a safer driver. What matters is how you
use the information.

How to use this handbook

Welcome to the Road to Solo Driving

There is a lot to know before you get your learner permit,
such as:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

the age requirements
the Graduated Licensing System
the Learner Log Book
learner permits
P licences (P1, P2)
demerit points
road rules
licence tests
hazards and risks
problems caused by alcohol and drugs, and so on.

How to use this handbook
This handbook is divided into five sections.
Each is colour coded with a vertical band on the outside
edge of each page.
The next section explains the steps to getting your
licence and becoming a driver.
Chapter 1 explains the challenges facing new drivers.
Chapter 2 covers the process of learning to drive
and the importance of supervised driving practice.
Chapter 3 describes the risks of driving and
strategies to manage these risks.
Chapter 4 describes some of the most important
road rules and responsibilities.

Important information
It is important to know that when there is a statement
of road law, the word ‘must’ is used.

The licensing journey

L
YOU ARE
HERE

Read, study,
and understand
the Road to
Solo Driving.

Go for your Learner
Permit test. This is a
computerised test
based on the Road
to Solo Driving.

If you are 21 years or over
you go straight to a P2 (green)
Probationary Licence.

When you are a Learner you should get as much experience
as possible with a supervising driver. If you are under 21
years when you go for your drive test you will need to show
you have had at least 120 hours of driving experience.

Go for your Probationary Licence test.
This is a computerised hazard perception test
and then a driving test. You will need to have a
lot of experience to pass these tests.

P

P

You will spend at least 12 months on a
P1 (red) Probationary Licence. There are some
special rules for P1 drivers to help you stay safer
while you gain experience as a young solo driver.

You will spend at least 3 years on a P2 (green)
Probationary Licence. There are some special
rules for P2 drivers to recognise your improving
safety as you get closer to a full licence.

Use the four stages in
the Learner Kit to make
sure you get the right
sort of practice. It will
also help you decide
when you are ready to
go for your licence.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

You are starting on your licensing journey. Here is a quick overview of the path ahead.

If you have a good,
safe driving record,
you will continue on
to a full licence.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

page

1 Read and understand Road to Solo Driving

2 Book your learner permit test

3 Pass your learner permit test

4 Pay for and be granted your learner permit

5 Get as much driving experience as possible using the four stages in the Learner Kit

6 Book your probationary licence test

7 Pass your probationary licence test

8 Pay for and be granted your probationary licence

9 Follow the P plate rules, stay safe and keep your licence

10 Receive your full driver licence

Make sure you have the latest edition of this handbook and
read it thoroughly. You can check whether you have the latest
version of this handbook by visiting vicroads.vic.gov.au
which will tell you when the latest edition was printed.
Learning the information in this handbook and knowing the
road rules are the first step to being ready to take the learner
permit test.

Language options
When you sit for your learner permit test or your
probationary licence test, you can choose to do the
learner permit test and the Hazard Perception Test on
the computer in any of the 14 languages available
(for a full list, visit vicroads.vic.gov.au).

The 10 steps to getting your licence

Step 1 - Read and understand Road to
Solo Driving

The 10 steps to getting your licence
Step 2 - Book your learner permit test

You will be asked:

You must be at least 16 years old before you can sit the test.

•
•
•
•
•
•

You can book your learner permit test:
• online at vicroads.vic.gov.au (using a valid
Mastercard or Visa*)
• by phone (using a valid Mastercard or Visa*)
• Call: 13 11 71
International calls: + 61 3 9854 7764 (licensing)
TTY: 13 36 77
Speak and Listen: 1300 555 727
• in person (go to any VicRoads Customer Service Centre,
for locations visit vicroads.vic.gov.au or call 13 11 71).
*Please note: a card payment fee will apply when
using Mastercard or Visa. For further information
visit vicroads.vic.gov.au.

your full name
date of birth
address
mobile phone number
email
when and where you would like to be tested.

Booking and test fees apply and must be paid at the time
of booking.
You will be given an appointment number that you should
write down. You will need to bring this number with you
for your test.
Note: If you cannot keep your appointment, you need
to give VicRoads 24 hours notice to cancel your test.
Otherwise fees will not be refunded unless you produce
a medical certificate or other supporting evidence. If you
transfer your appointment, regardless of when you contact
VicRoads, an additional appointment fee will apply.

The learner permit test includes:

You need to bring:

• reading an eyesight chart to test your vision
• a computerised, multiple-choice test based on this
handbook to test your knowledge of road law and
road safety.

• your appointment number
• evidence of identity and age, as set out on page 12
• payment for your 10 year learner permit.
If you have poor vision you must bring an eyesight certificate
from a registered optometrist or ophthalmologist (eye doctor).
If you have a disability or illness that may affect your driving,
you will need to bring a medical report from your doctor
stating that you are medically fit to drive. If you are unsure or
would like advice, contact VicRoads for further information.
Once you have a learner permit, you must tell VicRoads if
you develop any medical condition or injury that may affect
your driving.

The best way to prepare for the test is:
• read and study this handbook until you understand it all
• when you understand the handbook, use the practice
test on the VicRoads website at vicroads.vic.gov.au to
help revise.
The practice test items on the website are good, but they
don’t test all the information you will need to know to pass
the learner test and the probationary licence test later on.
That information is in this handbook.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

Step 3 - Pass your learner permit test

The 10 steps to getting your licence
Evidence of identity
Before you sit for your learner permit or your
probationary licence you must prove who you are and
that you live in Victoria by bringing certain documents
to a VicRoads Customer Service Centre.
All evidence of identity documents must be originals
and you must also ensure that all names on each of the
documents match and are in the same/correct order.
Photocopies, certified or otherwise, are not acceptable.
You need to bring:
• one category A evidence document
For example a passport (current or expired by up to
two years) or Australian birth certificate (birth extracts
and commemorative certificates are not acceptable).
• one category B evidence document
For example a phone, gas or electricity bill (no
more than one year old); or a current Medicare card,
entitlement card issued by the Commonwealth,
student identity card, credit or account card issued
by a bank, building society or credit union.

• evidence of Victorian residence
If not shown on the category A or B evidence
documents or if you have changed address.
If documents cannot be provided, you can ask a
referee (who has known you at least 12 months
and holds a current Victorian licence) to complete
the ‘Victorian residence declaration’ on your Licence
or learner permit application form.
• evidence of change of name or differing names
If there is a difference in names between the category A
and B evidence documents or if you have changed your
name, one document that shows your correct name,
for example a marriage or Change of Name certificate.
For more information and a complete list of evidence
of identity documents visit vicroads.vic.gov.au

After you pass the test you will:
•
•
•
•

pay for your learner permit, which is valid for ten years
have your photo taken for your learner permit
be given a paper learner permit receipt
receive a handout on how to download the myLearners
app or a copy of the Learner Kit (containing the Guide
for Learners with the Learner Log Book and the
Guide for Supervising Drivers).

Information found at myLearners.vic.gov.au or in the
Learner Kit will help you get through your learner period
and pass the probationary licence test. If you are not given
a Learner Kit, you should ask for one.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

Step 4 - Pay for and be granted your
learner permit

You will be able to practice driving on the paper learner
receipt until you receive your learner permit card.
Your learner permit card will be sent to you through the mail
in about a week. Make sure VicRoads has your correct
current address.

The 10 steps to getting your licence
Step 5 - Get as much driving experience
as possible
The best way to prepare for the Drive Test at the end of the
learner period is to get as much supervised experience as
possible in many different driving situations. This is true for all
learner drivers – it is much harder to pass the test if you only
have a small amount of experience.
If you are less than 21 years old when you go for your licence
test you must:
• complete a minimum of 120 hours supervised driving
experience including 20 hours of driving at night
• ensure that you and your supervising driver have
completed the declaration in the myLearners app or take
your completed Learner Log Book with you when you
go for your probationary licence test. The Learner Log
Book will be checked before you take the drive test to
make sure everything has been completed correctly.
If you are 21 years or over you are encouraged to use the
Learner Kit, but you do not need to present the Learner
Log Book when you go for your probationary licence test.
This handbook, the myLearners website and the Learner Kit
are essential in getting your 120 hours of driving experience.

• The Road to Solo Driving has important information
about road rules that all drivers need to know. You are
expected to know and comply with the road rules when
you attempt the probationary licence test
• The myLearners app will record your 120 hours
of driving. You can also follow the four stages on
how to safely commence your driving practice at
myLearners.vic.gov.au
• The Guide for Learners also gives you a four stage plan
for your 120 hours
• The Guide for Supervising Drivers explains the four
stage plan to your supervisor so they know how to help
• The Learner Log Book is your record of your progress
– and is essential proof that you have achieved your 120 hours.
Do not practise without a learner permit.
Remember, you can’t get behind the wheel unless you have
a learner permit.
Without a learner permit you can’t practise on public roads
and in car parks. Doing so can result in you being charged
with unlicensed driving.
Driving safely requires a number of skills. Getting your learner
permit helps you understand the road rules, know your legal
responsibilities and prepare for the challenges of driving.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

Learner permit restrictions
All car learner permit holders must:
• carry their learner permit card or receipt at all times
while driving
• display L plates on the front and rear of the vehicle,
visible from a distance of 20 metres
• be accompanied by a supervising driver holding a full
(not probationary) driver licence at all times while driving
• must have a zero Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC)
at all times while driving (see pages 71-74 for more
information)
• not touch or use voice controls on a hand-held or
mounted mobile phone or other device. If you’re planning
on using navigation, or playing or streaming audio
material, you’ll need to set it up before driving.
For navigation, a safer option is to only use the GPS
audio directions and avoid looking at the images on the
screen. Simple audio and navigation adjustments may be
made using an inbuilt device only when driving. Scrolling,
entering numbers and text is not permitted unless parked
• not tow a trailer or another vehicle
• only drive a car (not a bus or truck).

Definition
Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) is a measure
of the amount of alcohol you have in your blood.

The 10 steps to getting your licence
Step 6 - Book your probationary
licence test
To get your probationary licence, you must:
• be at least 18 years
• have held a learner permit for a continuous period of
at least:

Definition
Continuous period means that the permit must not
have been broken by a suspension, cancellation or
a break in continuity such as allowing the permit to
expire before regaining a new permit.
• If you are under 21 years when you apply for a
probationary licence, you must produce evidence of
having completed 120 hours of supervised driving
(including at least 20 hours at night) either in the
myLearners app or by presenting the Learner Log Book.
If using the Learner Log Book:

-

12 months in the period immediately before applying
for a driver licence if you are under 21 years

-

6 months in the period immediately before applying
for a driver licence if you are over 21 years but under
25 years

-

3 months in the period immediately before applying
for a driver licence if you are 25 years or over.

-

All necessary details must be completed and each
entry signed.

• not be disqualified from driving in Victoria, in Australia
or overseas
• pass a computerised Hazard Perception Test and then
pass the driving test (see Drive Test on pages 19-20).

-

The Declaration of Completion must be signed by
both the applicant and a supervising driver. The List
of Supervising Drivers must be completed and signed
by all supervising drivers.

-

You should carefully read the instructions on the front
of the Learner Log Book to understand how to fill
in the log book correctly.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

Fact
An incomplete or incorrect Learner Log Book will not
be accepted. You will not be able to take your driving
test, all your fees will be forfeited, and you cannot take
your test for six weeks.
There are serious consequences if entries in the Learner Log
Book are found to be incomplete or incorrect. You will lose
your booking and test fees, and be prevented from taking the
probationary licence test for at least six weeks. You may also
be liable to penalties under the Road Safety Act 1986.
You can book your test:
• online by visiting vicroads.vic.gov.au (using a valid
Mastercard or Visa*)
• by phone (using a valid Mastercard or Visa*). See page 10
for contact numbers
• in person (go to any VicRoads Customer Service Centre,
for locations visit vicroads.vic.gov.au or call 13 11 71).
*Please note: a card payment fee will apply when using
Mastercard or Visa.
For further information visit vicroads.vic.gov.au.

Note: If you cannot keep an appointment you will need to give
VicRoads 24 hours notice to cancel your test, otherwise fees
will not be refunded unless you produce a medical certificate
or other supporting evidence. If you transfer your appointment,
regardless of when you contact VicRoads, an additional
appointment fee will apply.

The 10 steps to getting your licence
Step 7 - Pass your probationary
licence test
You can be tested at any of the VicRoads Customer Service
Centres listed on the inside back cover of this handbook.
Your driving supervisor or instructor has to provide a
registered, roadworthy car with a speed display on the
dashboard that the testing officer is able to easily see, have
seatbelts for all occupants and that is fitted with L plates for
the drive test. The car needs to also have a centrally mounted
handbrake accessible to the VicRoads testing officer if you
will be sitting the driving test without a driving instructor.
You need to bring your:
• appointment number
• current learner permit
• completed Learner Log Book which includes the
completed Declaration of Completion and List of
Supervising Drivers (if you are under 21 years, when you
apply for a probationary licence). If using the myLearners
app, ensure that your and your supervising driver have
completed the declaration in the app
• payment for your probationary licence.

If you cannot prove that you have completed 120 hours of
driving practice, including 20 hours at night, you will not be
permitted to sit the test. Your appointment and test fees will
be forfeited and you will also have to wait at least six weeks
before you can take the driving test.
If you have a medical condition or injury that may affect
your driving and you have not previously told VicRoads,
you must provide a medical certificate which states your
fitness to drive. Once you hold a probationary licence,
you must tell VicRoads if you develop any medical condition
that might affect your driving.
The test includes:
• reading an eyesight chart to test your vision
• a computerised Hazard Perception Test to see how
safely you respond to traffic situations
• a driving test to assess your driving skills (see Drive Test,
pages 19-20).

The challenges of driving
The Hazard Perception Test is designed to see how safely you
respond to traffic situations.
• For each item in the Hazard Perception Test, you will
watch a video of a traffic situation where you are asked
when it is safe to do something like slow down or make
a turn
• You have to respond safely to each traffic situation
• For some items, you click the mouse button when it is
safe to perform the driving task
• For other items, there is no time when it is safe to
perform the driving task and you should not click the
mouse button.
You can take this test when you are 17 years and 11 months.
You have to pass the Hazard Perception Test before you can
sit the Drive Test. The Hazard Perception Test will indicate
how well you are able to observe the whole road environment
and anticipate potential hazards (see Practice is the best
way on pages 41-42).

Facing
the real challenges of driving
Definition

A
potential
anything in the road
Some
factshazard
aboutcan be
driving
environment that could present a danger or a risk
How
complicated is driving?
while driving.

Drive Test
The on-road driving test is designed to identify drivers with
the safe driving skills that develop with driving experience.
You are more likely to pass the drive test if you:
• have had more than 120 hours of driving experience
• have had driving experience in a broad range of different
driving conditions – such as at night, in wet weather,
and on roads with different speed zones.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

The Hazard Perception Test

However 120 hours experience does not guarantee that you
will pass. You need to also demonstrate safe and legal driving
during the test (so you should brush up on your road rules or
read this handbook again before you attempt the drive test).

The 10 steps to getting your licence
You will drive for about 30 minutes during the test and the test
route will include a range of driving conditions and tasks.
You will have to show that you can:
•
•
•
•

control the vehicle correctly
obey the road rules
cooperate with other road users
demonstrate safe driving skills.

Your ability to drive safely in less demanding situations will be
assessed first. This is to make sure that you have basic car
control and traffic skills. If you pass this part of the test, you
will then be assessed in a broad range of traffic situations.
If you do something that is unsafe in the test, the test
will be stopped and you will fail.
Further information about the Drive Test is available at
vicroads.vic.gov.au
If you are tested in a car that has dual controls and your
instructor holds a current Driving Instructor Authority Number,
you can have your driving instructor with you. Otherwise,
only the VicRoads testing officer will be with you. Other
passengers are not usually permitted.

Definition
If a car has dual controls, it has additional pedal(s) on
the passenger side for use by the accompanying driver.
If you are tested in a vehicle that is fitted with an automatic
transmission you will be restricted to driving only vehicles
that are fitted with an automatic transmission during your
probationary period. The only way this restriction can
be removed earlier is by passing another drive test in a
manual car.
If you hold a probationary licence and you are undergoing
instruction or testing in a manual vehicle, you must display
a yellow plate measuring approximately 150 mm by 150 mm
inscribed in black letters with the words ‘Driver under
instruction’. Your P plates must also be displayed.

Once you have passed the test, you will:

Facing9 Step
the
Follow
real the
challenges
P plate
of rules,
drivingstay safe
and keep your licence
Some
facts about driving
Having your probationary licence will mean you have
demonstrated the minimum skills required to drive solo.

• pay for your probationary licence
• have your photo taken for your probationary licence
• be given a paper probationary licence receipt.

How
complicated
driving?
New probationary
driversishave
three times the risk of crashing

You will be able to drive on the paper probationary licence
receipt until you receive your probationary licence card.

Severe penalties may be applied for breaching any of the
rules, including licence suspension, extension of your
probationary period, or licence cancellation. Additional
penalties for drink driving convictions also include completion
of the Drink and Drug Driver Behaviour Change Program,
fitting of an alcohol interlock device and other heavy penalties.

Your probationary licence card will be sent to you through the
mail in about a week. Make sure VicRoads has your current
and valid address.

compared to experienced drivers. There are some rules for
probationary drivers to help them stay as safe as possible.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

Step 8 - Pay for and be granted your
probationary licence

You will need a good driving record to progress through the
licence system. A good driving record means your licence
has not been cancelled or suspended and you have not
had any drink and/or drug driving offences. Your licence
may also be suspended if you get too many demerit points –
probationary drivers have a stricter limit than other drivers.

The 10 steps to getting your licence
If you are less than 21 years old when applying for a
probationary licence:
• you will start on a P1 probationary licence (the P1 licence
period lasts for a minimum of one year)
• if you have a good driving record you then progress to the
P2 licence period that lasts for a minimum of three years
• after holding your probationary licence for a minimum of
four years with a good driving record, you can then be
issued with a full driver licence.
If you are 21 years or over when applying for a probationary
licence:
• you will start on a P2 probationary licence (the P2
probationary licence period lasts for a minimum of
three years)
• after holding your probationary licence for a minimum of
three years with a good driving record, you can then be
issued with a full driver licence.

P1 probationary licence
In addition to obeying the rules that apply to all drivers, when
you are driving on a P1 probationary licence, you must:
• display red P plates on the front and rear of your vehicle
(plates measuring approximately 150 mm square bearing
a white letter P on a red background) and must be clearly
visible from a distance of 20 metres
• carry your probationary licence (or valid paper receipt)
with you at all times
• have a zero blood alcohol concentration (BAC)
(see Alcohol on pages 71-75)
• not drive a probationary prohibited vehicle (unless
you are driving the vehicle during working hours at the
request of your employer, have been granted a written
exemption by VicRoads, or while being supervised by
a full licence holder sitting beside the driver)
• not touch or use voice controls on a hand-held or
mounted mobile phone or other device. If you’re planning
on using navigation, or playing or streaming audio
material, you’ll need to set it up before driving.
For navigation, a safer option is to only use the GPS
audio directions and avoid looking at the images on the
screen. Simple audio and navigation adjustments may be
made using an inbuilt device only when driving. Scrolling,
entering numbers and text is not permitted unless parked

Tip
For more information about Probationary prohibited
vehicles (PPV) or other probationary restrictions, visit
the VicRoads website vicroads.vic.gov.au.

P2 probationary licence
In addition to obeying the rules that apply to all drivers, when
you are driving on a P2 probationary licence, you must:
• display green P plates on the front and rear of your
vehicle (plates measuring approximately 150 mm square
bearing a white letter P on a green background) and
must be clearly visible from a distance of 20 metres
• carry your probationary licence (or valid paper receipt)
with you at all times
• have less than five demerit points in twelve months
• have a good driving record to progress to a full driver
licence – if you don’t, your P2 licence will be extended

The 10 steps to getting your licence

• not tow a caravan, trailer or another vehicle (unless for
work and at the request of your employer, or for driving
solely in connection with agriculture, horticulture, dairying,
pastoral or commercial fishing or under supervision of a
full licence holder who is authorised to drive that vehicle,
and is sitting beside the driver)
• not carry more than one passenger aged between
16 and less than 22 years (unless exempt). Automatic
exemptions exist for carrying immediate family
members, when you’re with a fully licensed supervising
driver (as is the case for learner drivers) or for driving
an emergency vehicle
• drive only a vehicle fitted with an automatic transmission
if you passed the drive test in a vehicle fitted with an
automatic transmission
• have less than five demerit points in twelve months
• have a good driving record to progress to a P2 licence –
if you don’t, your P1 licence will be extended.

• not touch or use voice controls on a hand-held or
mounted mobile phone or other device. If you’re
planning on using navigation, or playing or streaming
audio material you’ll need to set it up before driving.
For navigation, a safer option is to only use the GPS
audio directions and avoid looking at the images on the
screen. Simple audio and navigation adjustments may be
made using an inbuilt device only when driving. Scrolling,
entering numbers and text is not permitted unless parked
• have a zero blood alcohol concentration (BAC)
(see Alcohol on pages 71-75)

The 10 steps to getting your licence
• not drive a probationary prohibited vehicle (unless you
are driving the vehicle during working hours at the request
of your employer or have been granted a written exemption
by VicRoads)
• drive only a vehicle fitted with an automatic transmission
if you passed a drive test in a vehicle fitted with an
automatic transmission.

Probationary prohibited vehicles (PPV)
When you have a P1 or P2 licence, you cannot
drive a probationary prohibited vehicle.
A vehicle is considered 'probationary prohibited'
if it has:
• a power to mass ratio of greater than 130 kilowatts
per tonne, or
• an engine that has been modified to increase
performance (other than a modification made
by the manufacturer in the course of the vehicle's
manufacture), or
• been declared a PPV by a notice published in
the Victorian Government Gazette.
You can apply to be exempted from this restriction
if it would cause you undue hardship.
Visit vicroads.vic.gov.au for more information.

Before your P2 probationary licence expires, you will be
sent a notice to renew it. You will need to take the renewal
notice to any photo point listed at vicroads.vic.gov.au,
pay the renewal fee and be photographed. You will then
be issued with a full driver licence paper receipt and your
licence card will be sent to you in the mail.
You must have a good driving record to graduate from a
P2 licence to a full driver licence. If you do not have a good
record, you might have to remain on your P2 licence for
longer than three years.
If you do not receive a renewal notice, it is still your responsibility
to renew your licence by the expiry date.

Language options
When you sit for your learner permit test or your
probationary licence test, the road law questions
and the Hazard Perception Test are available in
some languages, please check vicroads.vic.gov.au
for the current list.
If you speak a language or dialect that is not on this
list, you can have an interpreter present during the
test. If you are hearing impaired, you can ask to
have an Auslan or sign language interpreter present.
Interpreters are provided free of charge. When you
book your test, let the VicRoads officer know you
need an interpreter.

The 10 steps to getting your licence

Step 10 - Receive your full driver licence

Free Licence Scheme
The Free Licence Scheme rewards Victoria’s most
responsible young drivers. If you are under 25 and
have completed your entire P1 and P2 probationary
periods and have a good driving record, you may
be eligible for a free three year driver licence.
To check the rules for eligibility, go to
vicroads.vic.gov.au.

Key points
The Graduated Licensing System for people who are under 21 years when they apply for a probationary licence.
DRIVER'S
MINIMUM AGE

LEARNER PERMIT

P1 PROBATIONARY LICENCE

P2 PROBATIONARY LICENCE

16 years

18 years

19 years

DRIVER'S • medically fit
ELIGIBILITY • evidence of identity

ASSESSMENT • eyesight test

• knowledge test

FULL DRIVER LICENCE
22 years

• medically fit
• evidence of identity
• learner permit held continuously
for a minimum of one year
• Learner Log Book kept with a minimum
of 120 hours supervised driving practice
including 20 hours at night

• P1 probationary licence held for
a minimum of one year
(with no licence suspension)
• medically fit

• P2 probationary licence held for
a minimum of 3 years
(with no licence suspensions)

• eyesight test
• hazard perception test

• good driving record

• good driving record

• RED P plates displayed at front & rear
of vehicle when driving

• GREEN P plates displayed at front
& rear of vehicle when driving

• under .05 BAC
• must carry licence when driving
if under 26 years of age
• must not use a hand-held device
while driving, no use of messaging,
social media, movies/TV, video
games and calls, photos, emails and
other moving images. Entering text,
numbers and scrolling is banned.

P

P

(This test must be passed before the
practical driving test can be conducted.
This test can be undertaken at the age
of 17 years and 11 months)

• practical driving test

CONDITIONS • L plates displayed at front & rear

of vehicle when driving
• must carry learner permit when driving
• accompanied by a driver who has
a full car licence (non probationary)
• zero BAC
• no mobile device use, hands-free
or hand-held, (including voice
commands), except for navigation
and to play or stream audio material
if set up before driving
• no towing a caravan or trailer
• drives a car only (not a bus, truck
or motorcycle)

DURATION

L

10 years

• must carry licence when driving
• zero BAC
• no mobile device use, hands-free or
hand-held, (including voice commands),
except for navigation and to play or stream
audio material if set up before driving
• probationary prohibited vehicle restriction
• no towing a caravan or trailer
(unless for work or if under instruction)
• not carry more than one passenger aged
between 16 and under 22 years of age
• if tested in an automatic vehicle, only
drives a vehicle with automatic transmission
1 year (P1)

• must carry licence when driving
• zero BAC
• no mobile device use, hands-free
or hand-held, (including voice
commands), except for navigation
and to play or stream audio material
if set up before driving
• probationary prohibited vehicle
restriction
• if tested in an automatic vehicle,
only drives a vehicle with automatic
transmission
3 years (P2)

3 years or 10 years

LEARNER PERMIT

P2 PROBATIONARY LICENCE

16 years

21 years

DRIVER'S MINIMUM AGE
DRIVER'S ELIGIBILITY

ASSESSMENT

FULL DRIVER LICENCE
24 years

• medically fit
• evidence of identity

• medically fit
• evidence of identity
• learner permit held continously for a
minimum of 6 months if 21 to 24 years,
or 3 months if 25 years or over

• probationary licence held for a minimum
of 3 years (with no licence suspensions)

• eyesight test
• knowledge test

• eyesight test
• hazard perception test

• good driving record

Key points

The Graduated Licensing System for people who are 21 years and older when they apply for a probationary licence.

(this test must be passed before the practical
driving test can be conducted)

• practical driving test

CONDITIONS

DURATION

• L plates displayed at front & rear of vehicle
when driving
• must carry learner permit when driving
• accompanied by a driver who has a full car
licence (non probationary)
• zero BAC
• no mobile device use, hands-free or hand-held,
(including voice commands), except for
navigation and to play or stream audio material
if set up before driving
• no towing a caravan or trailer
• drives a car only (not a bus, truck or motorcycle)

• GREEN P plates displayed at front & rear
of vehicle when driving
• must carry licence when driving
• zero BAC
• probationary prohibited vehicle restriction
• if tested in an automatic vehicle, only drives
a vehicle with automatic transmission
• no mobile device use, hands-free or hand-held,
(including voice commands), except for
navigation and to play or stream audio material
if set up before driving

L

P

10 years

3 years (P2)

• under .05 BAC
• must carry licence when driving if under
26 years of age
• must not use a hand-held device while driving,
no use of messaging, social media, movies/TV,
video games and calls, photos, emails and
other moving images. Entering text, numbers
and scrolling is banned.

3 years or 10 years

Key points
The risk of being killed or injured in a crash is much higher during
the first few months and years of driving than it is later on.
Victoria’s Graduated Licensing System (GLS) aims to reduce
this risk. New drivers are introduced to driving progressively.
This ensures they can move through the learner permit and
the P1 and P2 probationary licence stages to earn their full
driver licence without being exposed to challenging driving
situations before they are ready.
The conditions of the GLS for those aged under 21 years
when they apply for a probationary licence are on page 26.
The conditions for those aged 21 years or over when they
apply for a probationary licence are on page 27.

Fact
The rules for drivers vary from state to state. You
should contact the Interstate Transport Authority to
check if additional rules apply.

Some facts about new solo drivers

The challenges of driving

Driving is not that easy

The challenges of driving

The challenges of driving

Number of Victorian drivers in casualty crashes
over a six year period (2015 to 2020)

1200

1000

Learner Driver
1 yr min.

P1 Probationary
Driver 1 yr

P2 Probationary
Driver 3 yrs

L

P

P

Fully Licensed Driver

1 year

Obtain
P Licence

1 year

2 years

3 years

4 years

Years after issue of permit/licence

5 years

6 years

7 years

You can see that learners do not have many crashes, and
that the number of crashes jumps up to very high levels as
soon as people first get their probationary licence. It then
decreases slowly over the next few years.
The graph shows four important things:

• Your risk of crashing will slowly decrease for many years
after you get your licence (see also graph below).

The challenges of driving

This graph shows how driver safety changes with experience.
The periods with the highest line on the graph are the times of
greatest crash risk.

• You are relatively safe as a learner driver with a
supervising driver to help you. This is why Victoria has
a long learner driver period and a 120 hour requirement.
This is the best time to learn the skills you need to be a
safer driver
• The highest crash risk is associated with new P plate
drivers. When you start to drive on your probationary
licence you will have the highest risk of crashing that you
will ever have as a driver. This is why Victoria has special
requirements for new drivers and a Graduated Licensing
System (GLS)
• Your crash risk will go down over the first few years of
driving experience, but you will still have a relatively high
risk of crashing for those first few years. This is why
Victoria has a four-year probationary period for most
new drivers

The challenges of driving
Driving is not that easy
Driving is complicated. Safe drivers have to handle many
different challenges, such as:
• different traffic conditions – from light traffic in local
streets to heavy peak hour traffic on busy highways
• rural and country roads
• extremes in weather – rain, fog or icy conditions
• different driving manoeuvres in busy traffic – driving in
roundabouts, changing lanes or turning at different types
of intersections
• poor visibility – night driving or sun glare when driving
at dawn or dusk
• unexpected actions of other road users – stopping
quickly, merging or turning without warning, or
pedestrians rushing onto the road without looking
• different types of roads – freeways, divided and undivided
highways, main roads, gravel roads or roads with trams
• bad road surfaces – potholes, gravel or slippery surfaces
• any of these challenges when there are distractions inside
the car – radio, passengers, mobile phones or other
electronic devices.

Even a common driving task like turning right at an
intersection is complicated:
• As you approach the intersection you will need to start
slowing down at the right time, drive at a safe speed
and decide whether you’ll need to stop completely
• You will need to be aware of other road users. Cars
around you might change lanes or stop suddenly and
there may be pedestrians about to cross the road
• If you change lanes you will need to choose a safe gap
between other cars. You will need to use your mirrors,
do head checks, change gears if necessary and use
turn indicators at the right times
• As you make the turn you need to be aware of potential
hazards like oncoming cars and other road users around
the intersection. Choosing a safe gap in oncoming traffic
is a significant challenge for new drivers.
The best time to gain experience with these driving challenges
is when you are a learner driver and you have a supervising
driver with you.

The challenges of driving

The challenges of driving
Some facts about new solo driving
New solo drivers are more likely to be involved in:
• crashes that involve losing control and driving off the road,
most often on straight sections of road
• crashes at an intersection when turning right in front of
an oncoming vehicle
• crashes at an intersection where they are hit by a right
turning vehicle
• crashes into the rear of another vehicle where the new
solo driver is often in the vehicle that hits the car in front.
See diagrams on the next page.

Definition
A head check means looking over your shoulder to see
things through the rear side windows – but don’t take
your eyes off the road ahead for more than a second.

These crashes occur because new drivers sometimes make
mistakes. They:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

misjudge gaps in traffic
drive too fast for the conditions
drive too close to other cars
are slower at recognising potential hazards
are easily distracted
do not look further ahead than the car in front of them
sometimes take risks.

These mistakes are not due to poor car control skills. They
relate to poor responses to the road environment and other
drivers. New drivers concentrate too much on car control
skills rather than observing what is happening around them.
New solo drivers have a high risk of crashing because they
don’t have as much experience as other drivers. Getting at
least 120 hours of experience as a learner in many different
driving situations is the best thing you can do to reduce your
crash risk.

P

fig 1. Single vehicle crash

P

• Travel at speeds suitable for
traffic conditions and the road
environment

P

• Slow right down on unfamiliar
roads and areas
• Don’t go beyond your own
driving skills or your car’s
limits.

• Don’t change lanes near
intersections
• Make eye contact with other
drivers

fig 3. Hit by a right turning
vehicle

• Don’t assume another driver
will give way to you.

• Reduce speed and slow down
before entering intersections

• Increase following distances

• Wait for a safe gap before
turning

• Travel at speeds suitable for
traffic conditions.

• Make eye contact with other
drivers
fig 2. Turning right at an
intersection

• Slow down before entering
intersections and look out for
vehicles turning across your
path

The challenges of driving

Common crash types for novice
and young drivers

• Reduce speed

P

• If you can’t see if any traffic is
coming – WAIT!
fig 4. Rear end

Practice is the best way

Your supervising driver is there to help

Put variety into your driving practice

Getting confident

Checking your progress

Hazard perception

The more you do something, the better you get. This is true
in everything people do. Whether it’s sport, music, work, or
anything else - practice and experience lead to better skills.
Research shows that new solo drivers with about 120 hours of
learner driver experience have a crash risk that is 30% lower
than new drivers with only about 50 hours of experience. This
is why the minimum requirement for young learners in Victoria
is 120 hours of driving experience.
It will take many years of driving experience, however,
to develop the skills needed to drive safely.
It’s not enough just to practice. Skilled sports people and
musicians plan and structure their practice and they make sure
they practice the key skills that will enable them to perform at
a high level. For learner drivers this means you should plan your
practice and experience by using information in the Learner
Kit, and you should focus on practising the safe driving skills
that will make you a safer driver.

Potential hazards can be the vehicles around you, such as:

Anticipating potential hazards and risky situations is known
as hazard perception. You will only develop good hazard
perception skills if you have lots of driving practice in many
different driving situations.

•
•
•
•

Definition

Pedestrians and bicycle riders can also present potential
hazards.

Hazard perception is the ability to:
• identify possible risks or dangers around you
• assess the level of risk and predict what might
happen
• respond in a way and in time to avoid or deal with
these potential hazards.
Hazard perception is not the same as reaction time. Young
drivers usually have good reaction times but poor hazard
perception skills. Reaction time is important – but your ability
to anticipate potential hazards is much more important.

the cars in front, behind and beside you
the motorcycle in the side street to your left
the truck double-parked up ahead
the train that will cross the road you’re driving on.

Hazard perception

Other hazards include:
•
•
•
•
•

weather conditions
potholes in the road
traffic conditions
the tightness of a curve ahead
over a hill where you can’t see what is on the other side.

Hazards can be anything in the road environment that could
present a danger or a risk while driving. New drivers often
don’t see or anticipate the potential hazards around them,
or see them too late.

Potential hazards can be anywhere, so you can’t rely on just
looking ahead and using your mirrors. There are blind spots
around your car regardless of how well you set up your rear
view mirrors. These are areas behind the driver that can’t be
seen using only mirrors, such as outside the rear door on
the driver’s side.

You can only see in these blind spots by moving your head
and quickly looking over your shoulder – this is called a
head check (see head check definition, page 34). Do this as
well as using mirrors to make sure you see everything around
you when reversing, changing lanes, merging or pulling out
to overtake.

Definition
To scan means taking in the road scene around you by
looking ahead, to the sides and in rear view mirrors.

BLIND SPOT

fig 5. Be aware of your blind spots

BLIND SPOT

As a driver, knowing exactly what is happening around you at
all times is essential. Learn to constantly scan and you will be
in a better position to anticipate hazards and respond in the
best way.

You will need to do head checks and use your mirrors
to check for hazards around your car.
Adjust your mirrors after you have positioned the
driver’s seat so that you can see clearly. When
adjusted correctly there will be an overlap between
the view from your outside and inside mirrors.
fig 6.

Adjust your outside mirrors so
that they just catch a view of
the edge of the car. In some
cars, a good guide is to be
able to see the rear door
handle in the bottom corner of
the side mirror.

Every driving practice session helps.
• Your performance will get smoother
• You will make better decisions
• You will get better at anticipating what might happen
around you.
The right structure for your practice will help you make
sure you are ready to drive solo by the time you go for
your probationary licence test.

Practice is the best way

Tip

The Learner Kit has a four stage plan for learning to drive.
This is the best way to make sure you get the right sort
of practice all through the learner period. You will get the
Learner Kit when you obtain your learner permit.
Check out the online resource, Lessons from the Road,
for supervising drivers. It is designed to help supervising
drivers support their learner driver. It features an online mentor
who guides the viewer through eight short videos with tips
and advice about the supervisor’s role. You may also find it
worthwhile, as it will help you to assist your parent(s) to step
into the role of your supervisor. Visit vicroads.vic.gov.au.

The four stages in the Learner Kit are:
• Stage 1 is all about controlling your car. It is the shortest
stage, and aims to get you to start, stop and steer safely
in a quiet area without traffic
• Stage 2 is about applying your new car-control skills
and looking out for other road users on quiet roads with
little traffic
• Stage 3 takes longer and uses your Stage 1 and 2 skills
on busier roads and in more difficult driving situations.
You learn to deal with traffic and other hazards to
become safe in varied driving situations
• Stage 4 can be the longest stage. It involves driving
as if you are a solo driver. You still have your Ls on the
car and a supervising driver beside you, but you’ll make
most of the driving decisions yourself. The aim is to build
up lots of different experiences where you act like a solo
driver. Then when you drive on the road on your own
you’ll be ready to make the right decisions.
The Guide for Learners and the Guide for Supervising
Drivers contain detailed advice about what you and your
supervising driver need to do in each of these four stages.
They also include checklists and information about how to know
when you are ready to move from one stage to the next one.

You and your supervising driver will have to work together to:

Driving takes much more effort in the beginning, when you
are learning – that is why you have your supervising driver
beside you. They don’t take the place of professional driving
instructors, but supervising drivers such as your parents can
provide the extensive practice opportunities you need. They
are there to help you:

•
•
•
•
•

• with an extra pair of eyes to watch the road
• with some decisions
• as an early warning system – to help anticipate potential
hazards.

The role of your supervising driver will gradually change as
you progress through the four stages of learning to drive.
You will take more responsibility for your driving and your
supervising driver will do less.

You will need a close partnership with your supervising driver
to make sure you have plenty of opportunities to practice. You
can help your supervising driver by making sure they read the
Guide for Supervising Drivers that you will get as part of the
Learner Kit when you pass the learner permit test.

Don’t forget to tell your supervising driver about Lessons
from the Road, the online resource for supervising drivers
at vicroads.vic.gov.au. This will help them in their coaching
role as your supervising driver.

plan driving sessions using the four stage plan
keep track of your progress
keep your Learner Log Book up to date and signed
decide when you are ready to move to the next stage
keep motivated to keep practising all the way through
the learner period.

Your supervising driver is there to help

Put variety into your driving practice
Over the learner period, you need to practise driving in a
broad range of different conditions, such as at night, in wet
weather, peak and off-peak traffic, on roads with different
speed zones and on sealed and gravel roads. You need to
get this broad driving experience while you have the support
of your supervising driver.

Tip
You don’t want to attempt to drive in difficult situations
for the first time when you’re a probationary driver
without the help of a supervising driver.
Use the Learner Kit to help you decide what sort of driving
you should be doing. You will get a broad range of driving
experiences if you build your learner period around the four
stages in the Learner Kit.
You should use the information you record in your Learner
Log Book to keep track of your hours and type of practice,
and the Guide for Learners can help you decide when
you should start practising in different road types and
driving conditions.

You will be a safer driver if you have lots of different
experiences as a learner, and you will have less trouble
passing the Drive Test.
Take every opportunity to practise for 10, 20, 30 minutes,
or an hour. Frequent short drives are far more valuable than
a few long drives. At the start of the learner period, shorter
more frequent practice sessions are more productive and
less stressful for both the learner and the supervising driver.
In Stage 4 you can offer to drive for everyday activities such
as going to the shops, schools or other family activities.
Becoming the family chauffeur is an easy way to increase
your regular driving practice.

As you progress with practice you may think you are picking
things up quickly.
Practice will build your confidence as a safe driver and this is
a good thing. But don’t become overconfident!
You will see early signs of improvement in your driving – this
tends to be mainly in controlling the car. What may have
seemed difficult or impossible the very first time – such as just
turning left – seems simple after a few lessons or a few hours
behind the wheel.
This can be misleading. There is more to driving than just car
control. There are many skills you need to develop to be a
safer driver. You can only develop most of these skills if you
have as much practice as possible in many different driving
situations. The main skills are:
• Car control: This includes steering, braking, using
pedals, buttons and other controls. These skills usually
come quickly, but there is much more to safe driving.

• Visual scanning: New drivers tend to look mostly to
the front of the car, and not very far ahead of themselves.
As you get more experience you will find it easier to scan
to the sides of the car, to use your mirrors and scan
further ahead. Experience will help you develop a good
awareness of what’s happening all around you
• Identifying and responding to risks: You need to have
a lot of driving experience before you can identify risks or
potential hazards. Your experience in many different driving
situations helps you learn how to recognise a potential
hazard and respond to risky situations – your experience
is the best teacher. You will be able to draw on your
experience to respond quickly to potential hazards
• Making decisions: Drivers have to make many quick
decisions while driving, such as deciding when to slow
down and by how much, when to accelerate, what speed
is best for different conditions, when to change lanes or
overtake. New drivers have to think about these decisions
and cannot make them as quickly as experienced drivers.
Lots of experience in different driving situations helps you
to make many driving decisions more quickly – giving you
more time to concentrate on safe driving.

Getting confident

Tip
If your brakes fail:
• pump on the brake pedal hard and fast
• apply the handbrake carefully so the vehicle
doesn’t skid
• if possible, change to a lower gear (even in an
automatic vehicle) and use your horn to alert
other drivers
• try to steer the vehicle so that you avoid a severe
collision.

Checking your progress
The Learner Kit tells you the best way to check on your
progress. It has checklists for each stage of driving that
you and your supervising driver can use to decide when
you are ready to move onto the next stage.
You will notice that your driving improves in some important
areas:
• As you become more experienced you will find your
driving changes from clunky and jerky to smooth and
fluid movements. Your speed control will shift from
‘on or off’ to ‘ease on and ease off’
• You will notice over time that your driving becomes much
more consistent. You will make fewer and fewer mistakes
like wandering in your lane
• You will get better at low speed actions like reversing the car
in a driveway and driving into and out of angled parking bays
• You will get better at anticipating potential hazards and
your supervising driver will not have to point things out
to you as often
• You will rely less on advice and suggestions from your
supervising driver.

Your aim should be to drive without relying on your
supervising driver, long before you sit the Drive Test.
This is why Stage 4 in the Learner Kit is important. It focuses
on taking full responsibility for driving in many different
situations. You will not be ready to sit the probationary licence
test until you have ticked off the items in the Stage 4 checklist
and when you can drive without relying on your supervisor.
This may take more than 120 hours.

Tip
Use the checklists in the Guide for Learners and the
Guide for Supervising Drivers as a helpful way to
monitor how you are going. The more practice you
do before driving solo the better prepared and safer
you will be.
Of course you will still keep learning while driving solo
but make the most of your time as a learner driver!
Also make sure you check Lessons from the Road
at vicroads.vic.gov.au.

Speed

Mobile phones and other electronic devices 53
Passengers

Other distractions

Fatigue

Seatbelts

Vehicle safety

Vehicle maintenance

Keys to reducing your risk of a crash

Alcohol and drugs

Driving involves risk – a risk that you may crash and that you
or others may be injured or killed. Good drivers aim to reduce
and manage this risk.
Getting at least 120 hours of supervised driving experience
as a learner driver will get you well on the way to being a
safer driver.
Some things increase the risk of crashing or being seriously
hurt for all drivers, and especially for new drivers:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

driving when affected by alcohol or drugs
speeding
using mobile phones and other electronic devices
passengers in your car
other types of distractions inside and outside your car
fatigue – driving when tired
not wearing a seatbelt
poor vehicle maintenance.

Alcohol, drugs and some medicines reduce your ability
to drive safely.
• You are much more likely to be involved in a crash if you
are affected by alcohol. Your risk of crashing increases
as your blood alcohol level increases. A driver with a
blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of .05 has double
the risk of crashing
• Learner and probationary drivers must stick to zero
BAC. This means no alcohol at all. There is absolutely
no exception to this rule
• There are severe penalties for any driver who commits
a drink driving offence. Anyone whose licence and/or
learner permit is cancelled for a drink driving offence will
have to complete the Behaviour Change Program, and
install and use an alcohol interlock device for a period of
at least 6 months as a condition of relicensing
• Alcohol can remain in your system for some time after
you finish drinking. Drivers often test above zero BAC
in the morning after drinking the night before. More
information on alcohol and road safety can be found
on pages 71-75

• Different drugs will affect you in different ways, but
many have a bad effect on your driving. Driving while
impaired by drugs is illegal and carries severe penalties.
Like alcohol, there are no exceptions to this rule (see
pages 75-77)
• Many prescription and over-the-counter medicines can
affect your ability to drive safely. Ask your doctor or
pharmacist about how your medicine may affect your
driving. Don’t just rely on what your friends say
• Mixing alcohol, drugs or medicines together is even
worse than any one of them by itself. A driver who has
had a few drinks and used some cannabis will drive as
dangerously as a very drunk driver. The same is true
for other combinations of alcohol, drugs and certain
medicines.

Alcohol and drugs

Don’t mix driving with alcohol, drugs or medicines.
To avoid the risks plan ahead:
• organise someone to drive who stays alcohol and
drug free
• stay over rather than drive home
• arrange to be picked up by a friend or relative
• use public transport or take a taxi.

Speed
There is a clear link between speed and crashes. The faster
you go the greater your risk of having a crash. Speed is a
factor in almost 20% of fatal crashes and about 30% of
crashes involving only one vehicle – such as running off the
road. Speed also increases how seriously injured you will be
if you do have a crash.
Speeding is riskier for new solo drivers. Going faster than
other traffic reduces your margin for error. As a new solo
driver speeding gives you less time to do all the things you
have to do, such as:
• scanning the road
• anticipating possible hazards
• making the right decisions for each situation.
More information on speed can be found on pages 79
and 83.

Any use of a mobile phone or electronic device including
text messaging while driving is dangerous because it takes
your attention away from the road and affects your driving.
Anything that takes your attention away from driving and your
eyes off the road will increase your risk of having a crash.
This even applies to older, more experienced drivers.
• Using a mobile phone or other device causes you to:
– wander in and out of your lane
– follow too close to the vehicle in front of you
– not see traffic lights, other road users and other signals
• Talking on a mobile phone, even a hands-free one,
increases your chance of a crash.

Fact
Texting while driving is dangerous because it takes
your eyes and mind off the road.

• Learners, P1 and P2 probationary licence holders are
permitted to use a phone or any device only if set up
before driving and only:
– for navigation and to play or stream audio material
– if mounted in a commercial holder while driving.

Mobile phones and other electronic
devices

• Learner and probationary drivers cannot:
– touch a phone, other portable, commercially mounted
or wearable devices (including motorcycle helmet
devices) whilst driving
– use voice commands whilst driving
– change the audio once it has been set up before
driving, unless making simple changes using an inbuilt
device when driving
– Interact with text messages in any way
• Fully licensed drivers are permitted to use a mobile
phone or other device to make or receive calls using
voice commands while driving, or with minimal touch,
only if it:
– is securely fixed in a commercial holder, or
– can be remotely operated via the inbuilt device

• All Drivers (Learners, probationary and fully licensed)
are not permitted:
–

to use a device for messaging, social media, movies/
TV, video games, photos and other moving images,
emails and entering text, numbers and scrolling.
– to rest a device on your lap and pass a device to a
passenger
It helps to set the message on your phone to make it clear
to callers that you will not answer a call while driving.
You avoid the temptation of answering a phone by:
• switching the phone off
• putting the phone on silent
• putting the phone out of reach when driving.
If you have to make or receive a call, pull over safely and park.
Do not stop in an emergency lane to use a phone as this
is illegal.
Your mobile phone is not the only electronic device that can
distract you. You could be distracted by using or reaching for:
•
•
•
•

GPS navigation systems
in-car infotainment system
a smart watch
your passenger’s phone

• tablets or other visual display units (VDUs)
• hand-held game consoles
• laptops.
You can reduce the risk by:
• not having distracting devices in your car, especially just
after you get your P licence
• getting used to one or two distractions, such as the radio
or a GPS, late in your learner period while you still have
the support of a supervising driver
• making any changes to devices (setting up your GPS,
setting the radio) before you start driving
• using spoken directions from your GPS rather than trying
to look at the map while driving.
It is illegal to have a visual display unit (such as a DVD player,
passenger’s phone with a video) operating so you can see
it from the driver’s seat – even when the car is stopped, but
not parked. The only exception is for drivers’ aids, such as
navigation devices mounted to the car. The penalty can
include a fine and possible suspension of your licence.
Mobile phone and electronic device enforcement cameras
operate in Victoria.

Passengers can distract you and might increase your risk
of having a crash. You can reduce the risk by:
• keeping the conversation to a minimum – it is OK to ask
passengers to be quiet while you concentrate on driving
• ignoring any conversation when you need to concentrate
hard on your driving
• recognising situations where you need extra
concentration – such as intersections, school zones
or heavy traffic
• reducing your speed
• leaving a bigger gap between your vehicle and the
one ahead to give you more space and time to react
to a hazard
• asking passengers not to use their mobile phone
or other electronic device while you are driving unless
it is an emergency
• being a responsible passenger yourself and not
distracting other drivers, especially in complex conditions
• turning off the radio and other electronic devices that
might make the distraction worse.

While passengers can be distracting, they can also help
you with some tasks, such as changing the audio selection.
If you have a P1 licence, you must not carry more than
one passenger, aged between 16 and less than 22 years.
Regardless of your licence type, avoid carrying more than
one passenger during your first year as a solo driver.

Passengers

Other distractions
There are many other things inside and outside the car that
can distract you while you are driving. These include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

eating and drinking
smoking
brushing your hair
reading maps
fidgeting with the car controls
feeling upset or angry about something that has
happened
advertising signs
unusual events near the road
pedestrians and other road users
checking your makeup
reaching for a bag or another object.

Distraction caused by any of these can take your attention
from driving and might have serious consequences.
Your risk of being involved in a crash is much higher when you
are distracted and you take your eyes and mind off the road.

You can reduce the risk by resisting any temptation to do
something other than concentrating on your driving. This
is especially important in the first months of solo driving
as a P driver.

Fact
If a distraction is causing you to drive inappropriately,
you can be fined under laws for careless or dangerous
driving, or failing to have proper control of a motor
vehicle. As a result, you may receive a heavy fine, loss
of demerit points, or have your licence suspended or
cancelled.

Stop driving if you notice any of the following:

Driver fatigue is also a major cause of crashes. It can:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

• cause you to fall asleep at the wheel
• slow your reflexes, and affect your attention and
judgement.
Fatigue is often the result of having a busy lifestyle – parties,
late–night jobs and studying. It can happen when:
• you are driving during hours you would normally be
sleeping (10 pm - 6 am)
• you have not had enough sleep
• you have been awake too long (e.g. 17 hours)
• you drive as soon as you wake up
• you have been driving for more than 2 hours non-stop.
You might think that having coffee or taking a short break will
stop fatigue. They don’t – the only way to stop being fatigued
is to get enough sleep.

Tip
A 15 minute power nap can reduce your chances of
having a crash.

repeated yawning
starting to drift across the lane
eyes closing or your eyesight getting fuzzy
trouble keeping your head up
speed is increasing or decreasing unintentionally
can’t remember the last few kilometres of road
day-dreaming.

Fatigue

To reduce the effect of fatigue:
• stop if you are tired and have a nap
• don’t drive at times when you would normally be asleep
such as between 10 pm and 6 am
• ensure any medicines you take don’t cause drowsiness.
(Ask your doctor or pharmacist.).
On a long trip:
•
•
•
•
•

get plenty of sleep before the trip
share the driving whenever possible
plan ahead and rest overnight
take regular breaks
try to avoid driving during times you would normally
be asleep
• don’t start a trip after a long day’s work.

Seatbelts
Wearing a seatbelt correctly increases the chance of surviving
a crash.
Wearing a seatbelt is an important way of reducing risk not
just for you as a driver, but for your passengers as well. Don’t
just think about yourself – make sure your passengers also
buckle up, including rear seat passengers.
In a crash unrestrained drivers and passengers are often
thrown out of cars or are tossed around inside the car,
against the steering wheel, windscreen or other passengers.
People who are thrown out of cars in crashes are up to
25 times more likely to be killed than those who remain
within the vehicle.
Most crashes happen on short journeys. You must wear a
seatbelt at all times even if it’s only a trip around the corner.
More information on seatbelts can be found on pages 77-79.

Fact
Drivers will be fined (including demerit points) if
passengers are not wearing seatbelts and children
under seven years are not using appropriate child
restraints (see pages 77-78).
Passengers 16 years or older will also be fined for not
wearing seatbelts.

Fact
It is both dangerous and illegal to carry unrestrained
passengers in the boot, the back of utes or to drive
with any part of a passenger’s body outside the door
or window of a vehicle. Fines and demerit points apply.

The most important vehicle safety features you should try to
get are airbags and Electronic Stability Control (ESC), which
can only be fitted to the car at the time of manufacture.

Tip
If you have a tyre blowout while driving, remember to
keep a firm grip on the steering wheel, take your foot
off the accelerator and brake gently once you feel the
vehicle is under some control.

Tip

Buying a safe vehicle will protect you and your passengers
if you are involved in a crash. Whether you’re planning
to buy a new or used car, you can find out the safety
rating of the cars you’re interested in at TAC website
howsafeisyourcar.com.au or the Australasian New Car
Assessment program website ancap.com.au. Also look out
for the ‘Buyer’s Guide to Used Car Safety Ratings’ brochure.

Operation of Antilock Braking Systems (ABS)

Vehicle maintenance

To confirm if the car is fitted with ABS – check the
owner’s manual or ask the owner. Visit
vicroads.vic.gov.au and search for ABS for more
information.

• Tyre pressure and tread depth need to be checked and
maintained at safe levels. Tyre problems are a common
cause of defect related crashes
• Vehicles should be regularly maintained by an expert.

Vehicle safety
Analysis of crashes show that larger cars and cars with more
safety features generally provide better real world occupant
protection in a crash than smaller cars with less safety
features.

In an emergency stop with ABS, keep firm pressure
on the brake pedal. When ABS is operating there may
be a vibration or shuddering through the car and the
brake pedal may pulsate. For ABS to work properly
keep firm pressure on the brake pedal.

Keys to reducing your risk of a crash

Strategy 2 - Slow down

There are some simple strategies which will help you stay safe,
especially in the first six months on your P plates.

As you are still building your experience, you cannot anticipate
potential hazards as well as drivers with more experience.
Having a young person’s reaction time is not enough.

Strategy 1 - Choose when and where to drive
As a new driver, you don’t want to jump in the deep end, even
with 120 hours experience as a learner. When possible, avoid
driving in challenging situations such as:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

very late at night
peak hour traffic in the city
freeways
rural roads
wet weather
fog
snow and ice
gravel and dirt roads.

You can reduce your risk of being in a crash by avoiding driving
too much in situations where you don’t have much driving
experience. Build up your experience slowly in these situations.

• Choose to drive at a safe speed under the speed limit
• When you see any potential hazard, such as pedestrians
or bicycle riders near the road, or turning vehicles in front
of you, slow down a little and move your foot on or near
the brake so you can stop if needed
• Create a buffer to give you a bit more time to react to the
unexpected
• You won’t notice going 2 or 3 km/h slower – it certainly
isn’t going to delay you in any way. So slow down a bit!
• The more you speed, the greater your risk of crashing
and the more severe your injuries could be. In a 60 km/h
zone your risk of crashing doubles for every 5 km/h you
exceed the speed limit
• The other thing to remember is that if you get caught
speeding you will be fined and will lose demerit points.
You may even lose your licence.

Having a bit more room to move gives you the space and
time to overcome mistakes – including mistakes made by
other drivers.
Give yourself enough time to react by leaving plenty of
distance between your vehicle and the vehicles around you.
Leaving a safety margin can make the difference between
stopping in time and crashing.
fig 7. Safety margin

The safety margin is the
space ahead, behind and
to the sides of your vehicle.

You must keep your vehicle a safe distance from any vehicle
in front of you. A safe distance should be enough to allow
time to slow down and avoid trouble.
Most drivers should be at least two seconds behind the
vehicle in front. You can check this by a simple test:

Strategy 3 - Give yourself some space

• Focus on a marker in the distance such as a signpost or
tree and note when the vehicle in front passes the marker
• Count the number of seconds before your vehicle passes
the same marker
• If your count is not at least two seconds then you’re
too close.
2 seconds

fig 8. Following distance

Definition
The following distance is the space or gap between
you and the vehicle in front.
A two second gap will allow for an average person’s reaction
time but leaving a larger gap – say three or four seconds – is
a safer option for young drivers as they develop their hazard
perception skills. Three or four second gaps are also a good
safety margin:
•
•
•
•
•

in distracting conditions
when visibility is poor or when it is dark
when the road is wet or slippery
when you have a heavy load
on a gravel road.

Heavy vehicles such as buses, trucks, trams and trains
cannot manoeuvre like cars. They take longer to stop and
longer to change direction, so they need larger safety margins
to drive safely. Do not move into their safety margin.

If a vehicle behind is too close don’t feel pressured to
speed up.
If it is safe to do so, slow down slightly to increase the
safety margin in front of your vehicle. This will give you more
time to respond to a potential hazard so you don’t have
to brake suddenly.
Don’t forget to make sure you have enough space all around
you before you change lanes by using your mirrors and doing
a head check.

Fact
If you are driving a long vehicle (any vehicle which,
together with its trailer, is at least 7.5 metres long) and
you are following another long vehicle, you must drive
at least 60 metres away from it, except:
• in a built-up area (one with buildings next to the
road or street lights), or
• on a multi-lane road.
You also need to keep back at least 200 metres when
following another long vehicle in a road train area.

Strategy 5 - Driving safely at night

Don’t focus all your attention on the vehicle in front. Keep your
eyes moving and scan the traffic scene. Look well into the
distance, to both sides and behind you by using your mirrors.

Driving at night is more complicated than driving during
the day because you cannot see as far ahead or as far
around your car. It’s much harder to anticipate potential
hazards at night.

You don’t naturally look around like this. You will need to
practise and think about what others on the road might be
intending to do. Your supervising driver will be able to help
you. You can also use your time as a passenger to practise.
Plan your trips before you start out. Use a directory to check
out the route you will travel.
Try using familiar routes wherever possible. This helps to
reduce your workload and stress while driving.

Strategy 4 - Think ahead

Even with 120 hours of driving experience you may not have
had much experience at night. Once you get your licence,
ease into driving and keep night driving to a minimum,
particularly in the first few months of solo driving.
Keep your speed down at night so you will have time to
identify and respond to potential hazards.

Tip
Make sure you get lots of practice driving at night
when you are driving with your supervisor.

Fact
Crash risk is higher at night, with half of all
probationary night-time crashes occurring on Friday
and Saturday nights.

Strategy 6 - Driving safely on country roads

Strategy 7 - Dealing with other road users

Country roads can present a variety of conditions: sealed,
unsealed and gravel.

As a driver you share the road with many other people:

Get as much practice as you can under a variety of weather
and light conditions on all forms of country roads when you
are a learner.

•
•
•
•

other drivers of cars, vans, trucks, buses and trams
pedestrians
motorcyclists
bicycle riders.

Sharing the road with all these road users is easier and safer
if you drive cooperatively. This means:
• using your indicators to allow plenty of warning when
you are turning or changing lanes
• allowing plenty of space between your car and the
one in front of you
• controlling your speed in a smooth manner rather than
a fast stop/start manner
• staying in the left lane except when you are passing
• keeping intersections clear
• letting others merge into the traffic
• changing lanes correctly
• slowing down when approaching and passing through
roadworks.

•
•
•
•
•

two lanes merge
the left lane ends
extra lanes exist just before and after intersections
overtaking lanes or divided roads end
cars are parked and there is not enough room
for two vehicles to pass
• drivers need to exit from a small side street
• drivers are parking.
Driving a car in today’s traffic can be frustrating and stressful
at times. If you lose your temper, it affects your judgement
and reduces your ability to drive safely.
You can keep your cool by:
• planning your trip, allowing plenty of time to get to your
destination and knowing how to get there
• if you’re running late, calling ahead before you get behind
the wheel
• where possible, avoiding driving if angry, tired or
emotionally stressed.

Sometimes you might make a mistake – it might be as
simple as not indicating early enough or moving into what
another driver considers to be their personal space. This
might upset another driver and lead to them losing their
cool. They might tailgate, flash their headlights, use the
horn or make obscene gestures.

There are times when the need for cooperative driving is
essential. This includes places where:

You can help others keep their cool on the road. Here’s
what you can do.
• Always drive cooperatively, even when others are not
• Give other drivers plenty of space so they don’t feel
like you are invading their personal space
• Concentrate on driving and pay attention to changes
in driving conditions (speed, roadworks etc.)
• If you make a mistake while driving, acknowledge it
• If another driver makes a mistake or becomes
aggressive, try not to react – remember it is a
mistake, not a personal attack
• Only flash your headlights or use the horn to warn
other drivers about a situation that could be dangerous
• Don’t make offensive hand gestures.

If you come into contact with an aggressive driver, don’t take
it personally.
• Drive normally and try not to react
• Avoid eye contact
• Give the other driver plenty of space: if the other driver
is in front, increase the gap between you, and if the other
car is tailgating you, maintain a steady speed or provide
an opportunity to let them pass
• If hassled or confronted, keep your doors and windows
locked and do not get out of your car
• If you are very concerned, drive to the nearest police
station.

Using a car affects the environment. You can reduce
your impact on the environment by using ’Eco-driving’
techniques. Eco-driving is smart driving as it helps you save
money, protects the environment, and keeps you and your
passengers safe.
You can start using eco-driving techniques when you are
in stage 4 of learning to drive, or once you’ve got your licence
and feel more confident.
Drive smoothly.
• Avoid hard or unnecessary acceleration and severe
braking
• Decelerate smoothly by releasing the accelerator and
leaving the car in gear as you slow down
• Don’t take off too fast – otherwise you could use 60%
more fuel.
Slow down and maintain a steady speed.
• Slowing down and maintaining a steady speed will use
less fuel (at 110 km/h a car uses up to 25% more fuel
than cruising at 90 km/h)
• Use cruise control whenever safe.

Read the traffic flow.
• Stay back from the car in front to allow travel with the
flow of traffic
• Tailgating causes unnecessary acceleration and
deceleration and increases fuel use
• Allowing plenty of space gives you more time to see and
anticipate traffic situations, and minimise fuel use.
Plan your journeys.
• Try to avoid peak-hour
• Try not to use your car if you don’t need to – use public
transport, carpool, walk or cycle instead
• Take fewer car trips by planning to do a number of things
at once
• Reduce travel distances by going to nearby shops, and
walking or cycling to your local shops.
Maintain your vehicle.
• Keep your car’s tyres inflated to the highest pressure
recommended in the owner’s manual. If your tyre
pressure is too low, you’ll increase your fuel consumption
• Regularly service your vehicle to save yourself money and
minimise your impact on the environment.

Driving and the environment

Driving safely in tunnels

Drugs, medicine and driving

Sharing the road safely

Seatbelts

Railway level crossings

Speed limits

Parking

Penalties

Legal responsibilities

Traffic controls at intersections

Crash responsibilities

Give Way rules

Test yourself questions

Turning

Freeways

Alcohol

Rules and Responsibilities

There is more to driving than just knowing the road rules.
However, knowing the basic road rules is essential.

Important
In the diagrams shown in this section, the vehicles are
coloured green and red. In all cases, the red vehicle B
must give way to the green vehicle A.
The rules listed here are only a summary of the road
rules motorists must know. For more information visit
vicroads.vic.gov.au.
You can also purchase a copy of Road Safety Road Rules
2009, or view the relevant Acts and Regulations online (see
Resources to help you on pages 166-167).

Learner and probationary drivers must
not drive with any alcohol in their blood.
Zero Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC)
also applies to all restricted motorcycle
licence holders, drivers of taxis, buses
and other large vehicles, professional
driving instructors and some full licence
holders who have previously had a drink
driving conviction.
All other full licence holders (including
supervising drivers) must have a BAC
of less than .05.
In nearly 30% of Victorian driver
fatalities, the driver had a BAC of
.05 or more.

Alcohol

Definition
Blood Alcohol Concentration
(BAC) is a measure of the amount
of alcohol you have in your blood.
It is measured by the number of
grams of alcohol in 100 millilitres
of blood.
For example, a BAC of .05 means
.05 grams or 50 milligrams of
alcohol in every 100 millilitres
of blood.
It is also illegal to drink alcohol while
driving a motor vehicle or supervising
a learner driver.

Victoria Police

Alcohol affected drivers:
• feel overconfident and take risks
• are often unaware of the level of
their driving impairment
• have slower reflexes and poorer
co-ordination making it less likely
that they will be able to stop or
swerve in an emergency
• are less able to process information
and make appropriate decisions as
their vision, hearing and brain are
all affected.
A driver who has been drinking
struggles to judge speeds and
distances accurately and will often fail
to respond to potential dangers in the
traffic environment.
The ability to cope with more than one
thing at a time is greatly reduced (for
example, steer a course within a lane,
respond to traffic signals and avoid a
pedestrian who steps onto the road).

What are the risks?

Factors affecting BAC
Alcohol affects different people in
different ways and can even affect the
same person on different occasions in
different ways. You can drink the same
amount of alcohol on different days and
have different BAC readings each time.

RISK OF ACCIDENTS

The effects of alcohol on driving

.02

.04

.06

.08

.10

.12

.14

.16

BAC (BLOOD ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION)

fig 9.

Relative chance of crashing

as your BAC increases
The risk of being involved in a crash
increases dramatically if the driver has
been drinking alcohol. The graph shows
the average relationship between the
risk of having a crash and the amount of
alcohol in the blood. For inexperienced
drivers the risk at any BAC level above
zero will be even higher.

Some of the factors that affect BAC
include:
• gender – a woman drinking the
same amount of alcohol as a
man of a similar size will have
a higher BAC
• body size – a person of small build
will have a higher BAC than a larger
person drinking the same amount
of alcohol
• food consumption – food slows
down the absorption of alcohol so,
if you have not had a substantial
meal before drinking, you will reach
a higher BAC more quickly
• rate of drinking and the types of
alcohol consumed – the quicker

The effect of alcohol can also
exaggerate the mood you are in,
and make you more tired if you are
already tired.

Only time reduces your BAC level

How to avoid drink driving

Your body takes time to get rid of
alcohol. No amount of coffee, exercise,
cold showers, fresh air or vomiting will
help reduce your BAC. Whilst these
may make you feel more alert, they
don’t change the amount of alcohol
in your bloodstream or speed up the
processing of the alcohol by your liver.
The liver does this in its own time.

• Plan ahead. It is more difficult
to plan how to get home if you
have had alcohol to drink, as your
judgement will be impaired. Work
out your travel arrangements before
you go out and start drinking
• Planning ahead is especially
important for P1 drivers who need
to comply with the peer passenger
restriction
• Share a taxi with friends
• Take public transport
• Organise transport with a friend
and agree that whoever is driving
will not drink alcohol
• Organise to stay the night
• Arrange to be picked up by a
relative or friend who hasn’t been
drinking.
You can measure your BAC level by
using a public breath tester. These
are located in some hotels, clubs and
restaurants, and are useful to determine
your BAC level.

Tip
It is important to remember that
if you have a lot to drink the night
before, you are likely to have
alcohol in your blood the next
morning.

you drink and the greater the
alcoholic content of the drink, the
sooner you will reach a higher BAC
• general health – if you are in poor
health, your liver is less able to
process the alcohol you drink
• use of other drugs – combining
alcohol with drugs increases the
risk of motor vehicle crashes even
if you only drink a small amount
of alcohol.

You could do this a number of times
to get an idea of what BAC your usual
pattern of drinking leads to, and how
long it takes for your BAC to return
to zero.

Tip
If you drive after drinking your
driving will suffer. So remember,
the safest BAC is zero even when
you have a full licence.

Breath testing procedures
Police can request the driver of a vehicle
to undergo a breath test at any time.
There are many breath testing stations
or booze buses on Victorian roads.
You may also be stopped by police in
other vehicles and asked to undergo a
breath test. Thousands of drivers are
randomly tested every week.

You will be asked to blow into a small
device. It will give an indication of the
alcohol in your blood – if any. If you haven’t
been drinking there is no problem. If you
have a positive result, you will be asked to
do a second test on another breath testing
instrument. This reading will be used as
evidence if you are over the legal limit.
Drivers admitted to hospital after
any kind of road crash are required
to provide a breath test and when
requested to provide a blood sample.

Penalties
The penalties for drink driving are severe.
Anyone who is convicted of a drink
driving offence will have their licence
and/or learner permit cancelled. Before
they can get their licence/learner permit
back they must complete a Behaviour
Change Program and will be required
to install and use an alcohol interlock
device in any vehicle they drive for at
least 6 months, and at least 12 months
for repeat offenders, after relicensing.

Cancellation periods:
• Learner permit and/or probationary
licence holder with a BAC between
zero and less than .05 (first offence)
- 3 months
• Learner permit and/or probationary
licence holder with a BAC between
.05 and less than .1 (first offence)
- 6 months
• Full licence holder under the age
of 26 with a BAC between .05 and
less than .1 (first offence)
- 6 months
• Learner permit, probationary or full
licence holder with a BAC of .1 or
more (first offence) - cancellation
period and interlock condition will
depend on the BAC
• Repeat offender (learner permit,
probationary or full licence holder) 12 months or more

Drugs, medicine
and driving
Medicines and illegal drugs that can
affect safe driving are detected in over
30% of Victorian driver fatalities. In
Victoria it is an offence to drive a motor
vehicle while impaired by a drug.

Fact
Refusing a breath, blood or saliva
test is an offence.
Your licence will be cancelled and
you will be disqualified from driving
for at least two years if convicted
and will also have to complete an
Intensive Drink and Drug Driver
Behaviour Change Program. If you
refused a breath or blood alcohol
test you will also have to install and
use an alcohol interlock for at least
six months when relicensed.

Illegal drugs
Illegal drugs such as ecstasy, cannabis
(marijuana) and heroin can affect your
ability to drive safely.

Drugs like ice or ecstasy can:
• make you feel as if you are a
better driver
• have a negative effect on your
ability to drive, so you will be more
confident but less skilful
• lead to a strong need for sleep
when their effects wear off that can
increase your risk of crashing. You
may have your vehicle impounded.

• Any repeat drink driving conviction
will result in a learner permit and/or
licence cancellation of at least
12 months followed by a mandatory
Intensive Drink and Drug Driver
Behaviour Change Program and
require the installation and use
of an alcohol interlock device of
12 months or more when relicensed
• You will have to start again on your
learner permit or probationary
licence if your licence is cancelled
• Heavy fines can also be imposed
• You may have your vehicle impounded.

Cannabis can:
• stop you responding quickly to what
other drivers are doing
• reduce your ability to concentrate
and maintain attention, make
decisions and to react to
unexpected events
• make you miss important road signs
• reduce your ability to avoid potential
hazards.

Combining even small amounts of
cannabis and alcohol causes much
greater impairment than either one
on its own.
Driving with drugs in your blood or
saliva is an offence. Anyone who is
convicted of a drug driving offence will
have a licence ban and must complete
a Behaviour Change Program before
being relicensed.

Conditions that affect safe driving
Legally, if you are suffering from any
serious (permanent or long-term) illness,
disability, medical condition or injury
(or the effect of treatment for any of
those things) that may impair your ability
to drive safely, you must:
• contact VicRoads to report your
condition
• talk to a doctor about how it might
affect your driving.

Reporting a medically unfit driver
If you are genuinely concerned about
someone’s ability to drive safely, write
us a letter with their details (e.g. name,
address) and the reasons for your
concern. Under Victorian law, we must
investigate this information.

Examples of prescription medications
that can affect driving are:

Medicines

sleeping tablets
muscle relaxants
sedatives
some antihistamines (such as in
hay fever or cold and flu medicines)
• some strong painkillers.

Many prescription medicines and some
medicines bought over the counter from
a pharmacist can impair your driving
ability and increase the risk of crashes
by affecting your:

Not everyone will experience the effects
of a drug in the same way. When you
start using a new medicine, it is best
to ask your doctor or pharmacist for
advice on how it may affect your driving.

•
•
•
•

You can reduce the risk of a crash when
on medication by:

mood
concentration
co-ordination
reaction time.

•
•
•
•

• not using alcohol with your
medicines
• keeping to the prescribed doses
• not treating yourself with additional
medicines or other remedies.
Always check with your doctor
or pharmacist
• not using other people’s medicines

Tip
If you are worried about the effect
that your medicine has on your
driving, stop your driving – not your
medicine!
Stop driving and contact your doctor
or pharmacist if your medicine:
• affects your reflexes
• affects your ability to concentrate
• makes you sleepy or drowsy
• gives you blurred or double vision.

Plan to use alternative transport such as
taxis or public transport or ask a friend
to drive you.

Seatbelts
Wearing a seatbelt is the most effective
measure for reducing serious injury in
a crash. All drivers and passengers
must wear a seatbelt or appropriate
restraint. This includes children and
pregnant women.

Correct seatbelt use
Seatbelts must be worn with:
• the belt over your shoulder, running
across your chest, and
• be buckled low on your hip.

• reading and following the advice
on the labels on all your medicines.
Check with your doctor or
pharmacist if the label on your
medicine states that the medicine
may cause drowsiness.

Drivers are responsible for the restraint
of all passengers. The penalties for
unrestrained or improperly restrained
passengers include:
• fines and demerit points for the
driver, and
• fines for passengers aged 16 years
and over.
Seatbelt enforcement cameras operate
in Victoria.

Tip
Buckling up takes seconds –
serious crashes take lives.

Seatbelts are not designed to protect
small bodies in a crash. Children need
restraints that specifically fit their size.

Children
Drivers must ensure that children are
restrained in:
• a properly fastened and adjusted
rearward facing child restraint with
an inbuilt harness if they are less
than six months old
• a properly fastened and adjusted
approved rearward facing OR
forward facing child restraint with
inbuilt harness if they are more
than six months and less than four
years old.
• a properly fastened and adjusted
approved forward facing child
restraint with in-built harness OR
a properly positioned approved
booster seat and fastened and
adjusted seatbelt if they are more
than four years but less than
seven years old. The type of
restraint will depend on the
child’s size

• either a booster seat or an adult
seatbelt if they are seven years
to less than 16 years. It is
recommended that children
continue to use a booster seat
until they are at least 145cm tall.
Children under four years old must
not be seated in the front seat (in
vehicles with two or more rows of seats).
Children four years to less than seven
years old can only be seated in the front
if all other seats in the row(s) behind are
occupied by other passengers less than
seven years old.

Tip
Restraint Fitting Stations can help
you fit a child restraint or booster
seat to your vehicle.
Call 1300 360 745 for the nearest
location.

Child restraints, booster seats
and airbags
A rearward facing child restraint cannot
be used in the front seat when there is a
passenger airbag.
Children using forward facing child
restraints or booster seats in the front
seat of a vehicle should do so with
the seat pushed as far back from the
dashboard as possible.
It is safer for children to travel in the
back seat.
If a vehicle has airbags in other
positions, consult the vehicle owner’s
manual for advice on positioning child
restraints.
More information about child
restraints, booster seats and Restraint
Fitting Stations is available at:
vicroads.vic.gov.au and VicRoads
Customer Service Centres.

Pregnant women

Speed limits

Although there is an exemption for taxi
drivers from mandatory child restraint
requirements for children under seven
years old, taxis are required to have
anchorage points and parents are
encouraged to provide their own
child restraint or booster seat when
transporting a child under seven years
old in a taxi.

Seatbelts protect pregnant women
and their unborn babies, as long as
the seatbelt is properly fastened and
adjusted with the lap part of the belt
across the hips and below the baby.

Speed limit signs tell you the maximum
speed at which you can drive in good
conditions. You must always obey
the speed limit. Speed limits are set
according to the characteristics of the
road and the level of use by vulnerable
road users.

If there is no restraint available for use
in a taxi, children under one year must
not travel in the front seat and children
one year and over must be restrained in
a seatbelt.

Tip
An unborn baby is more at risk in a
crash if a seatbelt is not worn.

Travelling with animals
You must not drive with an animal
on your lap.
Animals carried in a trailer or on the
tray of a utility or truck (other than dogs
engaged in moving stock) must be
tethered in a way that prevents them
from falling off or being injured by the
movement of the vehicle.

Taxis and children

Built-up areas
The speed limit in a built-up area is
50 kilometres per hour (km/h) unless
signed otherwise.

Definition
A built-up area is where there are
buildings and/or houses next to
the road or there is street lighting
at intervals not over 100 metres
apart for a distance of 500 metres
or more.

Speed limited areas

Freeways and country roads

There are other signs which designate
speed limits for whole areas (networks
of roads) which have a sign on each
road into the area. These reduced
speed limits are to improve safety and
like all speed limits must be obeyed.

The speed limit on freeways and outside
built-up areas in Victoria is 100 km/h
unless signs tell you otherwise. Some
main streets in rural town centres have
50 km/h speed limits and, many rural
railway level crossings have 80 km/h
speed limits.

School speed limits

Children need to be protected from
fast travelling vehicles. Children are
easily distracted and can forget to
look for dangers on the road. They
also have trouble judging the speed
of approaching vehicles. For these
reasons, there are lower speed limits
outside all Victorian schools. Static or
electronic variable signs are used
to alert drivers to lower speed limits,
such as:

permanent 40 km/h
speed limits outside
schools on most
50 km/h roads.

time based
40 km/h speed
limits outside
schools on
60 km/h and
70 km/h roads.

40 km/h and 60 km/h
time based limits apply
on roads where the
speed limit is 80 km/h
or above.

A pedestrian struck by a vehicle
travelling at 40 km/h or more is unlikely
to survive. Shared zones have been
created to protect pedestrians.
Shared zones have a
speed limit of 10 km/h
or as indicated on the
Shared zone sign. In a
shared zone, drivers must
give way to pedestrians.

Safe speeds for different needs

Green lights can change to red

Speed limit signs tell you the maximum
speed at which you can travel. You have
to decide on a safe speed under the
specified limit.

A green light may turn amber or red
before you enter an intersection, so
drive at a speed that will allow you to
stop safely.

Here are some factors you should
consider.

The time of the day

Light or heavy traffic
If there is a lot of traffic, slow down
to the average speed of everyone else
and watch out for hazards. Pedestrians
often weave through cars stuck in
peak hour.
Shops, parked cars and people
Where there are shops, there are
people and cars. Electronic variable
signs at selected strip shopping centres
indicate reduced speed limits at high
risk times. Be alert. Pedestrians can
step out from between parked cars,
and parked cars can pull out from the
kerb suddenly. Slow down and try to
anticipate what others may do.

It can be difficult to see the road
ahead when you are driving into bright
sunlight at dawn or dusk. You will need
to slow down.

Shared zones

Wear sunglasses and use the sun visor
in your car. You need to slow right down,
or in some cases, pull over off the road
and wait for the conditions to improve.
Weather conditions
Driving in heavy rain, frost or snow can
be very dangerous – it may be difficult
to see and roads may be slippery. You
need to slow right down, or in some
cases, pull over off the road and wait
for the conditions to improve. You may
need to use hazard warning lights or
rear fog lights while parked (see Driving
in dangerous conditions or situations on
page 129).

Take care when mist or fog affects
visibility.

Country roads and animals

Unsealed roads

Slow down before entering a curve or
bend and accelerate gently as you drive
out of the curve. It can be dangerous to
brake on a curve or bend; you may lose
control of your vehicle.

When you see animals – beware.
They are unpredictable and can wander
or dart onto the road. Farmers often
move sheep or cattle and you need to
slow down while you are passing
(see Sharing the road with animals
on page 144).

Road works

Slippery roads

At road work sites the number of lanes
is often reduced and the road layout
changed to protect road workers.
Temporary speed limit signs are erected
to guide traffic through the work site at
safe speeds. All drivers must slow down
and obey the speed limits.

Slippery roads can be caused by rain,
mud, frost or ice. Not all areas that are
slippery when wet are signposted. Rain
makes all roads slippery. When it first
starts to rain, oil and dirt are washed to
the surface. Until further rain washes
these away, skidding can occur. Slow
down and always keep your distance
from the vehicle in front in these
conditions.

Dust from oncoming vehicles may
conceal unexpected hazards, such as
other vehicles, a dip or corner. Unsealed
roads can become very slippery when
wet or corrugated. Mud thrown onto
windows can reduce visibility. Slow
down and drive at a speed appropriate
for conditions because road holding
is reduced and stopping distances
are greater.

Curving roads

Unpredictable surfaces
The risk of losing control of a vehicle
can increase on roads with potholes,
wheel ruts or grooves, slippery surfaces
and loose gravel. Always be aware of
the road surface and adjust your driving
and speed according to the conditions.

Road edge
If you need to move a wheel off the
bitumen, such as when passing an
oncoming vehicle on a narrow road,
don’t panic. Pulling the wheel quickly to
get back on the road may lead to overcorrection and potential loss of control.
Slow down, brake gently if needed,
take your time and steer normally back
onto the bitumen when safe to do so.

Fact
At 60 km/h you may cover up to
67 metres before you can stop.

This makes a significant difference to
your chance of being involved in a crash.

50 km/h

Reaction

Braking

Stops in time

55 km/h

Hits at 14 km/h

60 km/h

Hits at 32 km/h

65 km/h

Hits at 44 km/h

70 km/h

Hits at 53 km/h

75 km/h

Hits at 63 km/h

80 km/h

Hits at 70 km/h

Metres 5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85

fig 10.

Dry conditions
The road is dry,
you have a modern
vehicle with good
brakes and tyres.
A child runs onto the
road 45 m ahead of
you while you are
travelling in a 60 km/h
zone. You brake hard.
Will you stop in
time?

50 km/h

Reaction

Braking

Stops in time

55 km/h

Stops in time

60 km/h

Stops in time

65 km/h

Hits at 32 km/h

70 km/h

Hits at 46 km/h
Hits at 57 km/h

75 km/h
80 km/h
Metres 5

Source: Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB)

At 100 km/h you may cover up to
142 metres before you can stop.

The road is wet,
you have a modern
vehicle with good
brakes and tyres.
A child runs onto the
road 45 m ahead of
you while you are
travelling in a 60 km/h
zone. You brake hard.
Will you stop in
time?

Speed makes a big difference to
your ability to stop. If you double your
speed, you cover almost four times the
distance before you stop.

Wet conditions

Wet conditions

Source: Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB)

How quickly do you think you
can stop?

Hits at 66 km/h
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85

fig 11.

Road signs provide information to help
keep you and others safe on the road.

However, some regulatory signs are
black and yellow:

These signs tell you what you must or
must not do. You are committing an
offence if you disobey these signs.
They are usually black and white,
sometimes with red indicating danger
or a restriction.

Safety zone sign and

These are signs showing which direction
you must, or must not take.

No left turn

Keep left unless overtaking

These signs enable drivers to get
through intersections and other places
safely (see Giving way to vehicles at
intersections on page 102).

Hand-held signs are often used at work
sites. They may also be found at school
crossings. Be prepared to obey the sign.

Where this sign is shown, or on multilane roads where the speed limit is over
80 km/h, you must not drive in the right
lane unless overtaking another vehicle,
turning right, making a U-turn, avoiding
an obstruction, or traffic is congested.

These signs alert you to possible danger
ahead. They are usually yellow diamond
shapes with black words or symbols.
Take notice of the advice these signs
give. It usually means slowing down.

Intersection warning signs are used to
warn you of the type of intersection ahead,
particularly when the intersection is
dangerous or difficult to see.

Sharp bends

An intersection is where two
or more roads meet and where
vehicles travelling on different
roads might collide.

Curves and bends signs tell you what to
expect – from simple curves, to winding
sections and sharp bends.

A winding section of road

Normal bend

Definition

Changing road layout

Cross-road intersection

Traffic lights ahead

End of divided road

T-intersection

Stop sign ahead

Two lanes for oncoming traffic

Staggered side road junction

Roundabout ahead

There are many types of intersections.

Changing conditions

Advisory speed signs are sometimes
used with other warning signs. The
advisory speed sign shows the
maximum speed that is safe to drive
in good conditions.

Hollow/dip in the road sign

Advisory speed sign used with
curve warning sign

Slippery when wet sign

When approaching railway level
crossings – slow down and be prepared
to stop.

These signs warn drivers of pedestrians
crossing the road.

Uncontrolled rail crossing on side
road sign

Railway level crossings

These are usually temporary signs
warning drivers to slow down and drive
carefully because there are road works
ahead. Keep road workers and yourself
safe when approaching road works.
Remember, road workers may not
be visible.

These standard green signs with white
lettering give information such as road
names, destinations along a route and
distances to the destinations.
Workers on the road ahead sign

Left lane ends, prepare to move (merge)
into another lane sign
You may proceed slowly sign

Slow down and be prepared to
stop sign

It is important to be able to ‘read’ the
white or yellow markings on the road.
Road markings can create regulatory
requirements which you must obey
and are there to provide a safer driving
environment.

fig 12.

fig 13.

Broken white
lines

Single
continuous
dividing lines

Many roads are painted with broken
white lines and single continuous lines
in the centre of the road.

On a road with a broken white dividing
line you must keep left of the lines and
drive as close to the left side of the
road as you can. You may cross these
lines to enter or leave the road, but only
overtake or U-turn if it is safe and if the
road ahead is clear.

A single continuous dividing line means
you can cross it to enter or leave the
road, but you must not U-turn or
overtake other motor vehicles.
Crossing a continuous white line is only
permitted to safely pass a bicycle rider,
and when the road ahead is clear and
it is safe to do so.

fig 14.

fig 15.

fig 16.

Double
continuous
white lines

Two white
lines with
continuous
line closer to
you

with broken
line closer to
you

You must always keep left of these
lines. Do not cross them to overtake
a motor vehicle, to turn, or to enter or
leave the road. However, you can cross
them briefly to pass a bicycle rider, only
if the road ahead is clear and it is safe
to do so.

A single continuous line to the left of a
broken line means you can cross it to
enter or leave the road, but you must
not overtake or make a U-turn.

You may cross these lines to overtake,
or to enter or leave the road, but only
overtake or U-turn if it is safe and the
road ahead is clear.

Crossing a continuous white line is only
permitted to safely pass a bicycle rider,
and when the road ahead is clear and it
is safe to do so.

You must not park on the same side of the road as a continuous white dividing line unless there is at least three metres
of clearance between your vehicle and the dividing line or unless otherwise indicated on a parking sign. The green
vehicles in Figures 13, 14 and 15 are driving alongside a continuous line, and must leave at least three metres clearance
if they wish to park on the left side of the road.

fig 17.

Broken
white lines
separating
lanes

fig 19.
fig 18.

Broken white lines separate lanes of
traffic going in the same direction. You
may change lanes if you signal, and if it
is safe to do so. Remember, you must
give way to any vehicle already in that
lane. You must drive with your vehicle
completely within a lane.
A driver must not cross a continuous
line separating lanes unless avoiding
an obstruction, permitted by sign,
or permitted to drive in a special
purpose lane.

If overhead lane signals are in use, travel
in the lanes over which there is a speed
limit sign, or a green or white arrow.
If the lane control device is showing a
red cross, you must not drive in that
lane past that point.

Sometimes the overhead lane signals
can change.
If the lane control device is showing a
downward arrow indicating a direction,
this means that the lane is closed ahead.
You must change lanes in the direction
advised when it is safe to do so.

Roads without marked lanes

Special purpose lanes

Tram lanes

Where there are no lane markings and
there are two or more lines of traffic
travelling in the same direction, you
may change from one line of traffic to
another if you signal, and if it is safe to
do so. However, you may only overtake
another vehicle on the left side when
it is turning right or if the vehicle is
stationary and it is safe to do so.

Special purpose lanes include bicycle
lanes, bus lanes, transit lanes and tram
lanes. Signs and/or road markings
are used to set aside lanes for special
vehicles. If specified on the signs other
vehicles may use these lanes. Drivers
must keep out of these lanes during the
times marked on the signs or, if no time
is specified, at all times. However, you
may travel in these lanes for up to
100 metres (only up to 50 metres in a
bicycle lane or tram lane), only when
necessary to do so, to enter or leave
the road, or to avoid an obstruction or
turning vehicle.

For trams and public buses only
(see Sharing the road with trams
on pages 138-140).

fig 20.

Road without
marked lanes

You must give way before entering a
special purpose lane. Some examples
of special purpose lanes are shown on
pages 94-95.

Bus lanes
For buses and other vehicles as
specified on a sign (see Sharing
the road with buses on page 141).

Transit lanes

For bicycle riders only. Parking is
allowed unless prohibited by signs.
If you need to turn left from the road,
you may drive along the bicycle
lane for up to 50 metres only if it is
necessary to do so. You should be
courteous to bicycle riders. You must
give way to bicycle riders in a bicycle
lane, and only move into a bicycle lane
when it is safe to do so.

During times specified on the signs,
transit lanes are for buses, taxis,
motorcycles, trams and vehicles
carrying two or more people (T2 sign),
or three or more people (T3 sign).

Fact
You may drive in a transit lane for
up to 100 metres if it is necessary
to make a turn.

Bicycle lanes

or stop to wait on it, as long as there
are no double lines outlining the island
on the left, but you must give way to
any vehicle in a turning lane or entering
a turning lane from a marked lane.

Traffic lane arrows
Arrows are painted on the road at some
intersections. They tell you the direction
traffic in each lane must go. If two
directions are shown, you may go either
way. You must not go in a direction
other than that indicated by the arrows.

fig 22.

Bicycle storage area

fig 21.

Bicycle lanes
Arrows may also be applied to
bicycle lanes.

A ‘head start’ bicycle area is sometimes
provided so that bicycle riders can be
seen by drivers when stopped at red
traffic lights. This is called a bicycle
storage area. A driver facing a red light
at an intersection with a bicycle storage
area must stop at the first stop line and
not proceed into the area marked for
bicycles until the light changes.
Painted traffic islands
Traffic islands are sometimes painted
on the road before a right turning lane.
You can drive over the painted island

fig 23.

Red vehicle B must give
way to green vehicle A
You should not enter the painted
island to turn right if the traffic is
not banked up.

fig 24.

Red vehicle B must give
way to green vehicle A
Where a painted island with a
continuous line separates traffic that is
travelling in the same direction, such as
at a freeway on-ramp, a driver must not
drive on the painted island.

fig 25.

fig 26.

Red vehicle B must give way
to green vehicle A

Red vehicle B must come to
a complete stop and give way
to green vehicle A.

See Giving way to vehicles at
intersections on page 102.

See Giving way to vehicles at
intersections on page 102.

Traffic controls at
intersections
fig 27.

Red means you
must STOP. Do
not enter the
intersection

fig 28.

Yellow means
STOP unless
you are unable
to do so safely

fig 29.

fig 30.

Green means
you may enter
the intersection,
but only if you
do not block the
intersection

You must not
turn right

fig 31.

Traffic lights with arrows
Traffic lights with arrows make turns
easier. If the arrow pointing in the
direction you want to go is red, you
must stop. If the arrow is green you may
proceed in the direction it is pointing if it
is safe to do so.

Tip
Half of all crashes happen at
intersections. Stay alert and obey
the intersection rules.

You may turn
right

fig 32.

You may turn
left

Some traffic lights signal a white T or
B on a black background. These are
used for trams and buses at some
intersections. Some traffic lights may
have red, yellow and green bicycle
lights which apply to bicycle riders.
Other road users must wait for the
normal green light.
fig 33.

Tram may
go. You must
wait.

fig 34.

Bicycle may
go. You must
wait.

Turning vehicles must always give way
to pedestrians who are crossing the
road they are turning into whether or not
there is a green ‘walking figure’ facing
the pedestrian.
fig 35.

Pedestrian
signal

Traffic lights for trams, buses
and bicycles

Stop and Give Way signs are used for
safety control at many intersections and
other places.
See Giving way to vehicles at
intersections on page 102.
Traffic lights not working
If the traffic lights are not working or
flashing yellow you must give way as
at any other uncontrolled intersection
(see page 103).

Give way rules
There will be many times when you are
driving when your path crosses that of
other road users. When this happens,
one or more of the people involved must
give way in order to avoid a collision.

Definition
To give way means that if there
is a danger that your vehicle
could collide with another vehicle,
person or animal you must slow
down and stop if necessary
to avoid a collision. If you are
stationary, you must remain
stationary until it is safe to
proceed.

Here are some everyday driving
situations when you will be required
to give way.

In slip lanes
You must give way to any pedestrian
in a slip lane.

Giving way to pedestrians
Pedestrians are vulnerable road users
because they are not protected in a
crash (unlike drivers and passengers
protected within a vehicle). The
road rules are designed to protect
pedestrians on the road in many
situations.
There are a number of driving situations
when you must give way to pedestrians.

fig 36. Slip lane

At pedestrian crossings

Definition

You must give way to any pedestrian
on a pedestrian crossing, and you must
not overtake another vehicle which has
stopped at a pedestrian crossing. When
approaching a pedestrian crossing, you
must drive at a speed that would enable
you to stop safely.

A slip lane is an area of road
for vehicles turning left that is
separated, at some point, from
other parts of the road by a
painted island or traffic island.

When turning left or right at any
intersection (except a roundabout),
you must give way to any pedestrians
crossing the road you are turning into.
At children’s crossings

not at intersections
You must give way not only to vehicles,
but also to any pedestrian at or near the
sign or line. This includes pedestrians
as well as bicycles crossing in front of
you on a shared or bicycle path.

See Sharing the road with pedestrians
on page 131.
On the footpath
When entering the road from a driveway
or adjacent land, you must give way to
pedestrians on any footpath, path or
nature strip you cross to enter the road.
You must also give way to bicycles and
other vehicles on the footpath, path or
nature strip.

When making a U-turn
You must give way to all pedestrians as
well as vehicles when making a U-turn.
At tram stops
Before passing a stopped tram, you
must stop at the rear of the tram, give
way to any pedestrians crossing
between the tram and the left side
of the road and not proceed while the
doors are open.

At intersections

There are other requirements that
drivers must comply with when passing
stopped trams (see Sharing the road
with trams pages 138-140).
Remember pedestrians can run onto
the road at the last minute in order to
catch a tram, so take extra care to look
out for them.

This also applies when leaving the road
to enter a driveway or adjacent land.
In shared zones
In a shared zone shared by both
vehicles and pedestrians, you must give
way to pedestrians (see Speed limits on
page 79).

fig 37.

Giving way to vehicles at
intersections

Fact
When the law refers to vehicles,
this includes not only motor
vehicles but also bicycles and
horses being ridden.

Stop or Give Way signs or lines at an
intersection
A driver facing a Stop sign or line must
come to a complete stop. After stopping
at a Stop sign or line, or when
facing a Give Way sign or line at an
intersection, you must give way to any
vehicle in, entering or approaching the
intersection except:
• a vehicle making a U-turn
• a vehicle turning left using
a slip lane
• an oncoming vehicle turning right
if that vehicle is also facing a Stop
or Give Way sign or line.

The Give Way rules apply equally
for these smaller vehicles.

fig 38.

Red vehicle B must stop
and give way to green
vehicle A, which is not
facing a Stop or Give

You could be charged just the
same for failing to give way to a
bicycle or a horse being ridden as
for failing to give way to a truck!

Giving way at intersections (except
T-intersections or roundabouts)
If there are no traffic lights or signs or
lines at an intersection, you must give
way to any vehicle on your right.

fig 39.

Red vehicle B must give
way to green vehicle A
(on the right) that is going
straight ahead

fig 40.

fig 41.

Red vehicle B using a slip
lane must give way to green
vehicle A (on the right)

Red vehicle B must give
way to green vehicle A
(on the right) that is going
straight
The same requirements apply
if the traffic lights are not working
or flashing yellow.

fig 42.

Red vehicle B must give
way to green vehicle A (on
the right) that is turning right

fig 43.

fig 44.

Red vehicle B turning right
must give way to oncoming
green vehicle A

Red vehicle B turning right
must give way to oncoming
green vehicle A that is
turning left

If you are turning right at an intersection
without traffic lights or signs or lines,
you must also give way to oncoming
vehicles going straight ahead or turning
left (except if they are turning in a slip
lane) as well as any vehicle on your right.

fig 45.

fig 48.

The Give Way rule is the same for all
T-intersections. When you enter the
continuing road from the road that ends,
you must give way to vehicles travelling
along the continuing road.

Red vehicle
B must give
way to green
vehicle A
that is on the
continuing
road

The red
vehicle
must give
way to the
pedestrian

Definition
A T-intersection is where two
roads meet and one of them ends.

T-intersections may not always
form a regular T

fig 46.

fig 49.

Red vehicle
B must give
way to green
vehicle A
that is on the
continuing
road

When you turn
right from the
continuing road
into the road
that ends, you
must give way to
oncoming vehicles

Giving way at T-intersections

fig 47.

Differing T-intersections

These diagrams show how to give way
at T-intersections without lights or signs,
or when traffic lights have failed or are
flashing yellow.

Red vehicle
B must give
way to green
vehicle A
turning right
from the
continuing
road

Some T-intersections are modified
so that the continuing road goes round
a corner. The road that ends is marked
by a continuity line and Give Way or
Stop lines or signs.
fig 50.
The red
vehicle B,
leaving the
continuing
road to enter
the road that
ends at the
intersection
must give way
to the green
vehicle A,
travelling on
the continuing
road.

Giving way at roundabouts
When entering a roundabout, you
must give way to:
• all vehicles already in the
roundabout
• all trams entering, or approaching
the roundabout.
Take care to look out for motorcyclists
and bicycle riders already in the
roundabout who may be harder to see.

Definition
A roundabout is an intersection
with a roundabout sign at each
entrance, a central island and one
or more marked lanes, or lines of
traffic, all of which have vehicles
travelling in the same direction.
You must always keep to the left of
the central island.

fig 51. Roundabout

Always give way to vehicles already in the roundabout. In this diagram, the red
B vehicles must give way to the green A vehicles. Enter only when there is a safe
gap in the traffic.

Bicycle and animal riders
In a roundabout, bicycle and animal
riders have the option of turning right
from the left lane, but they must give
way to drivers exiting the roundabout.

When a two-way road is divided by a
median strip, a Give Way or Stop sign
applies to the whole of the intersection.

Giving way on divided roads

Definition
A median strip is a dividing strip
on the road designed to separate
vehicles travelling in opposite
directions.
Turning from a divided road
When turning from a divided road,
you must obey the signs on the road
you are turning from. Normally a vehicle
in the same position as the red vehicle
B could continue if it is safe to do so.
However in Figure 53 the red vehicle
B is facing a Stop Here On Red Signal
sign, therefore it must stop until that
signal is green. If there is no sign, you
must give way to traffic when entering
a road from a break in the median strip
after turning.

fig 52.

The red vehicle B must give
way to the green vehicle A

fig 53.

Other driving situations when
you are required to give way
U-turn
When making a U-turn you must
give way to all other vehicles and
pedestrians.
Entering the road
Whenever you enter the road from a
driveway or adjacent land, you must
give way to all vehicles and pedestrians.

Entering the traffic stream

Zip merging

Whenever you enter the traffic stream
from a parked position, or through a
break in a median strip, you must give
way to all vehicles travelling on the road.

If you are on a road where there are no
lines marked and the road is such that
two rows of vehicles must merge into
one, you must give way to any vehicle
which has any part of its vehicle ahead
of yours. This is called zip merging.
Note: If you cross any lines marked on
the road, then you are not zip merging
but changing lanes and you must give
way accordingly.

Changing lanes
Whenever you change lanes from one
marked lane or line of traffic to another,
you must give way to vehicles already in
that lane or line of traffic. This includes
crossing over any broken line marked
on the road which indicates that a lane
ends, for example when merging into
freeway traffic.

Tip
Make a head check whenever you
are changing lanes or pulling out
from the kerb, but don’t take your
eyes off the road ahead for more
than a second.

Definition
When two lanes of traffic merge
into one and there are no lane
markings, this is known as zip
merging.

fig 54. Zip Merging

Red vehicle B must give way
to green vehicle A

Police direction
You must always follow instructions
from the Police or any other authorised
person.

fig 55. Changing Lanes

Red vehicle B must give
way to green vehicle A

Turning

Making turns

Plan when you will turn well in advance.
Move into the correct lane long before
you need to turn. Use the indicators to
give other road users plenty of warning.

Signalling your moves

Tip
Remember, road users can make
mistakes about who should give
way. Never assume the other driver
has seen you or will give way to
you. Make eye contact and always
proceed carefully.

Making right turns

Always use your indicators to let
others know you are about to turn
or change lanes.
The signal must be given for long
enough to warn others that you are
about to change lanes or direction.
You must signal for at least five seconds
when moving from a stationary position
at the side of the road or from a median
strip parking area.

fig 56.

To make a right turn you must:
• approach the intersection as close
to the left of the centre of the road
as possible
• turn just right of the centre of the
intersection.

fig 57.

Right turns on multi-lane
roads
On some multi-lane roads, arrows
painted on the road will show you
if right turns may also be made from
other lanes.
If road markings indicate how a turn is
to be made, you must make a turn as
indicated by the road markings.

Left turns on multi-lane roads

Making left turns

fig 58.

To make a left turn you must approach
the intersection as close to the left
side of the road as possible, but give
way to bicycles when crossing into
the bicycle lane (see page 95).
Where there is a slip lane, you must
turn using the slip lane (see slip lane
definition on page 100). But look out
for bicycle riders on your left who may
be going straight ahead.

fig 59.

For a multi-lane road, arrows painted
on the road will show you if left turns
may also be made from other lanes.
If road markings allow turns from more
than one lane, it is advisable that you
stay in the same lane when you turn
from one road into the other.

Exception to the turning rules

Hook turns

A driver turning right at an intersection
with traffic lights and a Hook Turn sign
must turn right by making a hook turn
as shown in Figure 61.
fig 60.

Trucks or vehicles over 7.5 metres long
displaying a Do Not Overtake Turning
Vehicle sign may use more than one
lane to turn (see Sharing the road with
trucks and other heavy vehicles on
pages 141-143). Do not overtake these
vehicles while turning if they display a
‘Do not overtake turning vehicle’ sign.

Fact
Hook Turn signs are found at some
intersections in central Melbourne
and South Melbourne. The signs
may be at the side of the road or
hung from overhead wires, so be
alert in checking for these signs.

1 Approach and enter the intersection
from as near as possible to the left.
2 Move forward, keeping clear of any
marked foot crossing, until your
vehicle is as near as possible to
the far side of the road that you
are entering.

Wait here until
the lights in
the street you
are entering
have changed
to green

3 Remain at the position reached under
Step 2 until the traffic lights on
the road you are entering have
changed to green.
4 Turn right into the road and continue
straight ahead.

You must be in the
left lane to make
a hook turn.
Indicate that you
are turning right

Fact
A bicycle rider may make a hook
turn at any intersection — not
just at hook turn intersections —
unless there is a No hook turn by
bicycles sign.

Turn and continue
straight ahead

To make a hook turn, you must:

fig 61.

Doing a hook turn - turning right from the left lane

U-turns

You must not make a U-turn:

When making a U-turn you must:

• over double continuous lines
• over a single continuous line
• where there is a No U-turn sign.

• have a clear view of traffic in
either direction
• signal your intention for
a reasonable time
• give way to all other vehicles
and pedestrians
• safely complete your U-turn
without disrupting other traffic.

If the sign is not at an intersection
continue on until you reach an
intersection before you make a U-turn.

fig 62.

U-turn where there is no
median
Where there is no median, it is
advisable that the U-turn be made
from the left side of the road.
Remember to watch out for traffic
approaching from behind you.

• at a No Right Turn sign unless there
is a U-turn Permitted sign.

fig 63.

U-turn where there is a median
Where there is a median, a U-turn must
be made from the right lane.

Turning and one way roads

fig 64.

Turning from one-way roads
When turning left or right from a
one-way road into a two-way road, you
must turn from a position close to the
side you are turning towards.

fig 65.

Turning into one-way roads
When turning left or right from a
two-way road into a one-way road, it is
advisable to turn into the nearest lane.

Turning left

A roundabout is considered to be a
special type of intersection, so different
rules apply. The Give Way rules on
page 107 explain what you must do
when entering the roundabout and who
should give way.

Approach in the left lane and stay in
that lane.

Sometimes roundabouts have more
than one lane. You need to follow these
rules about turning left or right or going
straight ahead.

Signal a left turn on your approach to
the roundabout and keep the signal
on until you have left the roundabout.
Going straight ahead

Making turns at roundabouts

Approach the roundabout in the left
or right lane.

Tip

Drive in the same lane through the
roundabout.

Decide before you enter the
roundabout if you are going to turn
right, turn left or go straight ahead.

Do not signal on your approach to the
roundabout, but if practicable, signal left
as you exit.

Fact
Bicycle and animal riders may
make a right turn from a left lane.

Turning right
Always approach the roundabout in the
right lane.
Drive close to the centre of the
roundabout and follow the right lane
as you leave.
Signal a right turn on your approach,
and signal left, if practicable, just before
the exit you are turning into, keeping
the signal on until you have left the
roundabout.

Fact
Where arrow(s) are marked on the
road before or in a roundabout you
must drive in the direction of the
arrow(s).

fig 66.

Turning at a roundabout

A three point turn is used to turn your
car around on a road which is not as
wide as your car’s turning circle. When
making a three point turn you must:
• put on your left signal before
stopping at the kerb
• put on your right signal before
leaving the kerb
• look in both directions before
commencing the turn
• proceed across the road to the
opposite kerb
• look in both directions along the
road before reversing
• look in the direction of travel before
and during reversing
• after reversing, look in both
directions before moving off.

FRONT

fig 67.

Three point turn

Three point turn

Freeways
There is special advice when driving
on freeways as freeway speeds are
often high and the traffic is heavy.

Entering a freeway
• Adjust your speed as you drive
along the entry ramp to match that
of the freeway traffic
• Clearly indicate your intentions
• Give way to traffic on the freeway
• Where there is a large enough
gap, merge smoothly with the
freeway traffic.

There are traffic lights at some freeway
entrances to control the flow of vehicles
onto the freeway when the traffic is
heavy. Electronic advisory signs will
let you know if these traffic lights are
operating. When operating, the lights
will change quickly, so that when the
light is green only one vehicle will be
able to enter the freeway.

Exiting a freeway
• Watch for signs that tell you that
you are approaching an exit ramp.
Exit lanes are usually on the left
• Maintain your speed and signal
your intention to exit well in advance
• Adjust your speed once you have
entered the exit ramp.
If you miss your exit, continue travelling
on the freeway until you reach the
next exit. Do not reverse on a freeway.
Do not cross the median strip.

Some freeway exits will have an exit
number sign which you can use to
help navigate and map your route.
The freeway exit signs can also provide
a location reference for emergency
services in emergency situations.

Variable speed zones

Be alert on freeways as traffic travels
at high speed. You must not drive
in the right lane unless overtaking or
unless all lanes are congested. This rule
also applies to the right lane used by all
traffic, if the lane to the right of that is
a transit lane.

Electronic variable signs on freeways
indicate reduced speed limits at high
risk times.

More information on transit lanes can
be found on page 95.

You are entering a tolled section of road.

Overtaking lanes

Stopping
You must not stop on a freeway except
in an emergency. If you have to stop,
use the emergency stopping lane only.
Put on your hazard warning lights.

Fact
Buses and taxis can sometimes
use the emergency stopping lane
when signs allow it. So watch
out for vehicles in the emergency
stopping lane, especially when
entering or exiting freeways.

Tollways
Fact
Tollways are sections of road
which the driver must pay to use.
Signs are displayed to advise
drivers that they will soon be
entering the tollway.

You are about to enter the tollway from
a non-tollway road. If you do not want
to enter the tollway, take the next exit.

Driving safely in tunnels
When driving in tunnels:

• Remove sunglasses before entering
a tunnel
• Turn on your headlights, so that
your vehicle is more visible
• Tunnels usually have variable
speed limits. Lower limits apply
when traffic is congested or when
an incident has occurred (e.g. a
crash or broken down vehicle).
Look for speed limit signs and stay
within the limit in accordance with
conditions
• Check and obey variable message
and lane control signs that provide
important information about safety
and traffic conditions
• Stay out of closed lanes. Even if you
can’t see the problem, always obey
signs and controller instructions
• Keep a safe distance from other
vehicles
• Lane changing causes many
crashes on busy arterial roads.

•

•

•

•
•

Avoid lane changing and overtaking
while travelling through tunnels
If you really need to overtake
another vehicle (e.g. if it is broken
down) make sure you are clear of
all other traffic and it is safe. Always
use your indicators to show your
intention to merge or change lanes
Turn your car radio on. Tunnels have
re-broadcast systems that convey
safety and traffic information to
drivers via their radio and the tunnel
public announcement system
Do not stop in a tunnel except in
an emergency or if directed by
the tunnel controller. Try to drive
out of a tunnel even if your vehicle
is damaged or has a mechanical
malfunction
Do not reverse in a tunnel
Do not enter a tunnel if your vehicle
is very low on fuel or you think that
you might break down.

If you break down in a tunnel you
should:
• If possible, drive out of the tunnel;
otherwise, try to stop in a right or
left lane, not the centre lane
• Switch on your hazard lights and
the radio
• Stay calm, an incident response
unit will attend to you as quickly
as possible
• Remain in your vehicle, unless
there’s a fire or you are asked to
evacuate by the control room
• If you do have to get out, watch
carefully for other traffic and move
to either the walkway or in front of
your vehicle. Never stand behind
your vehicle
• In an evacuation, look for the
running man symbols and flashing
lights for a safe exit point.

Cooperative strategies include:

As a driver you share the road with
many other people:

• always using your signals when
turning or changing lanes
• not following too closely
• smoothly controlling your speed
rather than driving in a fast start/
stop manner
• changing lanes correctly
• slowing down when approaching
road work sites.

• other drivers of cars, vans, trucks,
buses and trams
• pedestrians
• motorcyclists
• bicycle riders.

Cooperative driving
We all have places to get to and want
to arrive there safely. The best way to
make this happen is to cooperate and
help each other. It doesn’t really hurt
or waste any time to let somebody in
from a side street, when the traffic is
moving slowly.
You must not block intersections or
crossings. If an intersection, crossing or
road beyond an intersection or crossing
is blocked you must not enter.

Remember that cooperation is for all
road users. You also share the road
with pedestrians, motorcyclists, bicycle
riders, trucks, buses and trams.
There are times and places when
cooperation is essential. These include
places where:
• two lanes have to merge
• the left lane ends
• extra lanes exist just before and
after intersections
• overtaking lanes or divided
roads end

• tram stops where a tram passenger
unexpectedly alights from the tram
some time after other patrons have
alighted
• cars are parked and there is not
enough room for two vehicles
to pass.

Tip

Sharing the road safely

Cooperative driving helps you
to be a ‘green driver’. There is a
connection between your driving
style and the impact your driving
has on the environment. Drive
smoothly and avoid fast start/stop
driving – you’ll save fuel, pollute
less and save money as well. Even
better leave the car at home and
walk, ride your bike or use public
transport!

Keeping your cool when driving
Road rage or aggressive driving is
dangerous. It involves people losing
their cool, perhaps in response to a
mistake or action of another driver.
You can avoid road rage easily.
• The fundamental rule is do not
retaliate – it is never worth it!
• If you make a mistake while driving,
acknowledge it
• Don’t take the mistakes of other
drivers personally – remember it’s a
mistake not a personal attack
• Keep your cool and keep your
distance!
• Drive cooperatively and consider
the other people on the road!.

Sharing the road with other
motorists
Keeping to the left
On multi-lane roads with a speed limit
over 80 km/h, you must keep out of the
right lane unless you are:
•
•
•
•
•

overtaking
turning right
making a U-turn
avoiding an obstruction
driving in congested traffic.

You must also keep out of the right lane
where a Keep Left Unless Overtaking
sign applies.

(For more information on strategies to
keep your cool when driving, see pages
64-66.)

Signalling your moves
Before turning or changing lanes you
must signal for long enough to give
sufficient warning to other road users,
including other drivers, bicycle riders
and pedestrians. In 60 km/h zones, it
is best to signal for at least 30 metres
or about the length of two houses and
driveways before turning or changing
lanes.

Tip
Check that your indicator is off
after you have made your turn
or lane change – it may not have
turned off by itself. If it is left on,
other drivers will think you intend
to turn.
Before moving from a stationary
position at the side of the road or a
parking area in the middle of the road,
you must signal for at least five seconds.

Using your indicators
You must use your indicators when:
•
•
•
•
•
•

turning to the right or left
changing lanes or line of traffic
overtaking
making U-turns
pulling into and out of parking spots
leaving a continuing road which
curves to the left or right
• leaving a roundabout (if practicable)
• moving to the left or right from a
stationary position
• diverging to the left or right.

Watch other vehicles’ indicators and
make sure they are doing what is
indicated. Sometimes an indicator has
not cancelled from the last turn, or has
been put on too early. Make sure you
indicate in such a way that your signal
cannot be misleading.

Using your brake lights
Every time your foot touches the brake
pedal, your brake lights glow, warning
other drivers you are slowing down.
Likewise, you will need to slow down
when the brake lights on the vehicle in
front of you are glowing red. So give lots
of warning by braking early and slowing
gradually.

Here are some of the ways you can
signal your intentions.

Making eye contact
As well as watching out for indicators,
you can get an idea of what another
person might do by making eye contact.
To make sure another driver knows
you are there, try to make eye contact,
especially at intersections.

Tip
Use indicators even if there is
no-one else around – it’s the driver
you cannot see who can be the
most dangerous.

fig 68.

These vehicles are
signalling their moves,
but could be heading
for trouble as vehicle A’s
signal could be misleading

Using your headlights
and tail lights
Headlights help you to see at night.
Headlights and tail lights help others to
see you in poor light conditions. Your
headlights and tail lights must be on
between sunset and sunrise.
They must also be on in hazardous
weather conditions where there is
reduced visibility.

Don’t be dazzled by high-beam

Headlights on high-beam enable you
to see further. However, headlights on
high-beam may dazzle an oncoming
driver, so you must ‘dip’ them to
low-beam when another vehicle is
within 200 metres. You must also
dip your high-beam headlights
when driving within 200 metres
behind another vehicle.

Look to the left side of the road and
drive towards the left of your lane if a
car with high-beam headlights on is
approaching. If dazzled by the lights,
slow down and pull over until your
eyes recover.

Tip
If the street lights are on, your
lights should also be on.

fig 69.

If your vehicle breaks down on
the road
Make sure other drivers can see your
vehicle and stop in time. If possible,
pull out of the traffic flow. If you can’t
get completely off the road, try to stop
where people have a clear view of you
and your vehicle. Don’t stop just over
a hill or just around a curve.

Tip
Turn on your hazard warning
lights to warn other drivers. If
your vehicle doesn’t have hazard
warning lights use your left
indicator instead. Lift your bonnet
or boot lid to show other drivers
you are in trouble.

Driving in dangerous conditions
or situations
You may use hazard warning lights if
you are driving in dangerous weather
conditions, such as fog, smoke, or
if you are driving slowly and likely to
obstruct other vehicles or pedestrians.
You must not operate front or rear fog
lights unless driving in fog or hazardous
weather conditions. They can dazzle
other drivers if used in other weather
conditions.

Warning others of your approach
You must only use your horn if it is
necessary to warn other road users of
the approach or position of your vehicle.

How to overtake safely
If someone is overtaking you, you must
not increase your vehicle’s speed.
Here are some tips to reduce your risk
when overtaking:
Overtaking on a two way road
• Check the centre of the road
markings (see Road markings,
page 91). If there are double
continuous white lines, two white
lines with a continuous line closest
to you or a single continuous line,
you must not overtake
• Make sure you have a clear view
of any approaching traffic and that
there is enough space to overtake
safely. Remember that it is hard to
estimate the speed of approaching
vehicles
• Check that the vehicle in front or
behind is not also about to pull out
to overtake

• Do a head check
• Use your right indicator to let others
know you are about to overtake.
A vehicle behind may want to
overtake both you and the vehicle
in front
• If you are not sure you have enough
time, just wait. A few seconds or
minutes could save your life
• Never overtake if the road is
not wide enough for you to stay
completely on the sealed part of
the road, unless you can do so
at a low speed
• Judge the length of the vehicle
you are overtaking, because some
heavy vehicles are very long
• When safe, accelerate and overtake
the vehicle, then indicate left when
safe to return to your lane. You
must not exceed the speed limit
at any time

• You must keep a safe distance
when overtaking and not return
into the line of traffic until you
are a sufficient distance past
the vehicle you are overtaking.

Tip
One way to know if it is safe to
return to your lane is when you see
both headlights of the vehicle you
have overtaken in your rear view
mirror.
Overtaking where there are
no lane markings
When a road has no lane markings,
you must overtake a vehicle on its right
side. You must not overtake a moving
vehicle on the left, unless the vehicle is
turning right, or making a U-turn from
the centre of the road, and has its right
indicator flashing.

When a road has lane markings, you
may overtake in the left lane but
remember you are less visible to the
driver of the vehicle you are going past
if you overtake on the left.
Overtaking where there are
oncoming vehicles
Never underestimate the space and
time you will need to safely overtake
when there are oncoming vehicles. It is
hard to judge the speed at which they
are travelling. If in doubt – don’t pull out.
Overtaking where there are
hills and curves
If your view is blocked, don’t pull out.
Remember, you must not overtake
when there are double unbroken white
lines, two white lines with a continuous
line closest to you or a single
continuous line.

Overtaking at intersections,
rail crossings, shopping centre
entrances and pedestrian crossings
These are never good places to
overtake. Wait until you are on a clearer
section of road. You must not overtake
another vehicle stopped at a pedestrian
or a children’s crossing.
Passing bicycle riders
The same overtaking requirements
apply when passing a bicycle rider. You
must leave at least one metre between
your vehicle and bicycle riders when
passing on roads with speeds up to
60km/h. On roads above 60km/h the
space must be at least 1.5m.
You may cross the centre line to pass
bicycle riders, if you have a clear view
of the road ahead and it is safe for
you do so.

Sharing the road with pedestrians
Pedestrians don’t always do what
you expect. You should watch out
for them at all times. Here are some
places where you should take extra
care. Drivers are obliged to try to avoid
a collision even if the pedestrian is doing
the wrong thing. More information on
giving way to pedestrians can be found
on page 100.

Overtaking where lanes are marked

Tip
Pedestrians include not only
people on foot but also those
on wheeled devices such as
skateboards, rollerblades,
wheelchairs and motorised
mobility devices. A person pushing
a bicycle is also considered to be
a pedestrian.

Tip
Remember whenever you are a
pedestrian, you cannot rely solely
on the speed limits and road rules
to protect you. Always keep a look
out for vehicles (including bicycles
and motorcycles) because in a
crash a pedestrian will come off
second best.

Always approach a children’s crossing
at a speed from which you can
safely stop. You must stop at flagged
children’s crossings if a pedestrian is on
or entering the crossing, even if there
is no crossing supervisor present. You
must not proceed until the pedestrian
has left the crossing.

You must also stop if a hand-held Stop
sign is displayed at the crossing.

At a children’s crossing

Children’s crossing flag

fig 70.

When turning, you must give way to
pedestrians crossing the road you are
entering. Elderly people may not cross
the road in the time allowed by the
lights. Be patient and wait for them to
cross safely.
Pedestrian lights are often located away
from intersections to enable pedestrians
to cross roads safely. These traffic
signals generally operate the same
as lights at intersections. However,
at some locations, drivers may
proceed when the yellow light starts
flashing, provided they give way to any
pedestrians still on the crossing. These
crossings have When Flashing Give Way
To Pedestrians signs.

Pedestrian give way sign at a traffic light

At pedestrian crossings
Always approach pedestrian crossings
at a speed from which you can safely
stop. Not all pedestrians look before
they step onto crossings, so take care.
You must give way to any pedestrian on
a pedestrian crossing.

At safety zones, tram stops and
bus stops

Definition
A safety zone is the area of the
road at or near a tram stop with
safety zone signs and a traffic
island or dividing strip.

It is also a good idea when you are
waiting to pick up a bus passenger
to park on the same side of the road
that the bus will be travelling. More
information on sharing the road with
trams can be found on pages 138-140.
Slow down
when
approaching
safety zones,
tram stops
and bus
stops. There
is always
the risk of
pedestrians
getting off
a tram or
bus and
crossing the
road without
looking.

Slow down when approaching safety
zones, tram stops and bus stops.
There is always the risk of pedestrians
getting off a tram or bus and crossing
the road without looking. Pedestrians
are often hard to see when stepping out
suddenly from behind or in front of a
bus or tram.
fig 71.

At shared zones
Shared zones have a speed limit of
10 km/h or as indicated on the Shared
Zone sign. In a shared zone, you must
give way to pedestrians.

fig 72.

fig 73.

When coming out of driveways

Crossing on paths

If you cannot
see if anyone
is coming,
sound your
horn and
then drive out
very slowly.
Watch out for
children riding
on bicycles or
skateboards.

At tram
stops where
there is no
safety zone
between
you and the
tram, you
must stop
and give
way to any
pedestrians
crossing
between the
tram and
the left side
of the road.
You must
not proceed
while the
doors are
open.

fig 74.

You must give way to any bicycles or
pedestrians when leaving any private
property, such as homes, shopping
centres, service stations and car parks.

fig 75.

You must give way to any vehicles or
pedestrians on a shared or bicycle path
which crosses the road if you are facing
a Give Way or Stop sign.

There are other requirements that
drivers must comply with when passing
stopped trams (see Sharing the road
with trams on pages 138-140).

At shopping centres and car parks
At shopping centres, car parks and
other busy places there is a greater
chance of pedestrians crossing the
road unexpectedly or stepping out from
behind or between vehicles without
looking. Slow down and be alert.
Near schools
Take care when driving near schools
especially at times when children are
arriving or leaving. Watch out for
40 km/h or 60 km/h speed limits
outside schools.
Where children are walking or playing
Beware of children darting out suddenly
from between parked cars, near
playgrounds, bus stops or anywhere
you see children walking or playing.
Near libraries and senior citizens’
clubs
Be alert and take extra care in areas
where there are elderly people, such
as libraries, senior citizens’ clubs and
homes for the elderly.

Tip
Beware of children suddenly
coming out from between parked
cars, near playgrounds or bus
stops – they are often hard to see
over the tops of cars.
Vision impaired
Be aware of pedestrians with poor
or impaired vision who may be using
a guide dog, a white cane or white
walking stick. They may not see your
vehicle clearly or be able to judge the
speed of your vehicle.
Near hotels or nightclubs
Pedestrians who have been drinking
may be impaired by alcohol. They may
not pay attention to the traffic before
crossing the road.
Wet weather
Pedestrians may hurry and take risks in
the wet. Slow down and take extra care
in these conditions.

At night
Pedestrians may be particularly difficult
to see in the dark or near-dark conditions.
Motorised mobility devices
Motorised mobility devices include
wheelchairs, scooters and buggies that
are used by people who are unable to
walk or have difficulty walking. People
using motorised mobility devices must
obey the same road rules as other
pedestrians. Watch out for motorised
mobility devices.

Sharing the road with bicycle
riders and motorcyclists
You need to be especially alert for
bicycle riders and motorcyclists as they
are more at risk of injury than drivers.
Give bicycle riders and motorcyclists
space – they have the same rights
and responsibilities as you.
You must leave at least one metre
between your vehicle and both bicycle
riders and motorcyclists when passing
on roads with speeds up to 60km/h.

Before you open your car door, use
your mirrors and do a headcheck to
look for bicycle riders and motorcyclists
passing your car.

Tip
Doing a head check can be easier
if you open the car door with your
left hand.
When passing a parked car, bicycle
riders and motorcyclists should keep
well clear in case a door is opened
unexpectedly.
Bicycle riders and motorcyclists are
legally allowed to ride two abreast (up
to 1.5 metres apart); this makes them
easier to see. Give bicycle riders and
motorcyclists their own space.
Never share the lane with bicycle riders
or motorcyclists if you cannot leave this
clearance.

more than
1 metre

Riders can be hidden by large vehicles
which are overtaking them, such as
trucks and buses. Only move left or turn
left from behind a large vehicle when
you have a clear view and are sure that
the road is clear.

fig 76.

On roads above 60km/h, the space
must be 1.5m.

Watch out for bicycle riders
and motorcyclists
Bicycles and motorcycles are smaller
than cars and therefore harder to see
and are more likely to be hidden in your
blind spot. Keep a lookout for them,
particularly before turning or entering
an intersection or preparing to change
lanes. Intersections are where many
bicycle and motorcycle crashes occur
because vehicles turning left or right
cut across in front of the them.
Many motorcycles can accelerate
faster than a car. What looks like a safe
gap in traffic, may not be if there is a
motorcycle among the cars.

fig 77.

Watch out for bicycle riders and
motorcycles. Riders can be hidden by
large vehicles which are overtaking
them, such as trucks and buses.

Fact
Over one third of motorcycle
crashes and over a half of bicycle
crashes happen at intersections.
Remember: Always ‘Look Bike’.

Sharing the road with trams
Young, inexperienced drivers are
involved in more tram-pedestrian
crashes than more experienced drivers.
Remember these general rules about
sharing the road with trams.
• Do not pass a tram stopped at a
tram stop unless there is a safety
zone. You must stop level with the
rear of the tram, and not drive past
while the tram doors are open
• You may only overtake a stopped
tram if there are no pedestrians
on the road and the tram doors
are closed or if a uniformed tram
employee signals you through.
However, you must not exceed
10 km/h while passing the tram
• You must give way to a tram moving
into or across a roundabout

• You must not pass on the right of a
tram unless the tram tracks are at
or near the far left side of the road
• Buses travelling along tram tracks
must be treated as trams.

Broken yellow lines next to
tram tracks
These lines on roads give trams priority
at all times.
• You can cross a broken yellow line
and drive on tram tracks at any
time, however you must keep out
of the path of trams
• You must not delay a tram
• If you want to turn right, allow the
tram to pass you, or keep going
and turn right further on
• Do not pull out in front of a tram
and do not delay a tram.
Broken yellow
lines next to
tram tracks
mean the tram
has priority at
all times.

fig 78.

Part-time tram lanes
Full time tram
lanes have
continuous
yellow lines
next to the tram
tracks.

fig 79.

These tram lanes are in operation at all
times and the Tram Lane sign will not
show any times of operation. You are
not allowed to travel in a tram lane. You
may drive in a part-time tram lane for up
to 50 metres to enter or leave the road,
or briefly to overtake a bicycle rider.
However, you must not delay a tram.

Part-time tram lanes have Tram Lane
signs over the lane which indicate the
hours of operation and a continuous
yellow line to the left of the tracks. You
are not allowed to travel in a part-time
tram lane during the times it is in
operation (as shown on the Tram Lane
signs). You may drive in a part-time
tram lane for up to 50 metres to enter
or leave the road, or briefly to overtake
a bicycle rider. However you must not
delay trams even during the times when
the tram lane is not operating.

fig 80.

Definition

Part-time
tram lanes
have
continuous
yellow lines
next to the
tram tracks
and Tram
over the lane
showing
the hours of
operation.

Full time tram lanes

A tram lane is a part of the road
with tram tracks that is marked
along the left side of the tracks
by a continuous yellow line, and
is indicated by a Tram Lane sign.

Tramways

Common sense and tramways

Sharing the road with buses

Tramways are in operation at all times.
You must not drive in a tramway at
any time unless you have to avoid an
obstruction. Tramways are marked by a
Tramway sign over the lane and double
continuous yellow lines or physical
structures to separate trams from other
traffic. You may only cross where there
are breaks designed to permit vehicles
to cross the tramway.

If a parked or double parked vehicle
blocks your lane, you may not be able
to avoid driving in a tramway. You won’t
be breaking the law, but move to your
own lane as soon as possible to avoid
delaying a tram.

Buses may have special lanes. Only
public buses or other vehicles as
specified on the sign may use these
lanes. However, you may drive in a
bus lane for up to 100 metres if it
is necessary:

Trams are longer and heavier than
cars and it takes them longer to stop
safely. So, when you are passing a tram
or changing lanes, don’t pull into the
empty space immediately in front of
a tram. This is their ‘safety margin’.
Be careful and leave plenty of room.

• to enter or leave the road
• to overtake a vehicle that is turning
right or making a U-turn from the
centre of the road.

Tramways
have double
continuous
yellow lines
or separation
kerb next
to the tram
tracks and
tramway
signs over the
lane.

fig 80.

Some lanes are dedicated bus only
lanes and cannot be used by other
vehicles (unless avoiding an obstruction).
You will need to turn across these lanes,
giving way to any buses in the lane

Watch out for buses pulling out from the
kerb. In a built-up area you must give
way to a bus displaying a Give Way To
Bus sign and signalling that it is about to
pull out from the kerb into the left lane.
More information on built-up areas can
be found on page 79.

Sharing the road with police and
emergency vehicles

You must get out of the way of a police
or emergency, enforcement or escort
vehicle when its siren is on or it is
displaying red, blue or magenta flashing
lights. Give way and stop if necessary
(despite any other rules), even if you
have a green traffic light. These vehicles
have exemptions to rules in the case of
emergencies and may act unpredictably.
You must slow down when approaching
enforcement, emergency or escort
vehicles that are stationary or moving
slowly (less than 10km/h) when its siren
is on or it is displaying red, blue
or magenta flashing lights.

You must not exceed 40km/h when
passing enforcement, emergency or

escort vehicles that are stationary or
moving slowly (less than 10km/h) when
its siren is on or it is displaying red,
blue or magenta flashing lights and not
increase your speed until a safe distance
from the vicinity of the scene.
You do not need to slow for enforcement,
emergency or escort vehicles on the
opposite side of a divided carriageway
(separated by a median strip).

Bus only lanes

You must also stop if twin red lights are
flashing on a road, for example, outside
a Fire Station or Ambulance Station.

Sharing the road with trucks
and other heavy vehicles
Here are some tips about sharing the
road with trucks of any size.
Blind spots – be seen, be safe
All vehicles have blind spots where the
driver loses sight of vehicles around
them. The blind spot is larger for truck
drivers. If you cannot see the truck’s
external mirrors, the truck driver can’t
see you. This should be a ‘no stay spot’.
Either accelerate to overtake if safe

to do so or decrease speed and pull
back to where you can be seen. More
information on blind spots can be found
on page 40.
Don’t cut in
Trucks are longer and heavier than cars
and it takes them longer to stop safely.
So, when you are overtaking a truck
or changing lanes, don’t pull in to the
empty space immediately in front of a
truck. This is their ‘safety margin’.

Trucks pick up and deliver goods

Signs on trucks

Be prepared for trucks that are entering
or leaving driveways, roads or loading
docks to pick up and deliver goods.
Sometimes this will require extra
patience and courtesy on your part
to let them do so safely. Always be
prepared to allow extra room for a truck
to swing in or out of delivery points.
If possible make eye contact with
the driver to let them know you have
seen them.

An ‘Oversize’ sign, sometimes
accompanied by flashing amber lights,
is displayed on a truck that is longer
or wider than usual. The load may even
overhang into your lane. Take notice
and watch what is different about it
and adjust your driving to suit.
Remember, yellow flashing lights always
indicate caution is necessary. Some
oversized trucks are supported by pilot
vehicles and VicRoads Transport Safety
Services vehicles. Pilot vehicles provide
advance warning to other road
users of the presence of ‘Oversize’
vehicles and staff in VicRoads vehicles
manage traffic.

Tip

The nature of trucks

If you can’t see the whole front
of the truck in your rear vision
mirror before you pull into the
same lane, there may not be
enough room for the truck to
stop safely if the traffic suddenly
stops; it may hit you or another
vehicle. Be careful and leave
yourself plenty of room when
turning in the vicinity of a truck.

Trucks are bigger and heavier than
cars and therefore take more time to
accelerate especially when starting,
merging into traffic or going uphill. You
need to allow for this if you see a truck
pulling into traffic ahead of you. Be
prepared to overtake if it’s safe, or to
reduce speed if necessary.

A ‘Do Not Overtake Turning Vehicle’
sign tells you that the truck is at least
7.5 metres long and requires more
turning room to negotiate corners,
intersections or roundabouts. Trucks
displaying this sign may need part or all
of two lanes to turn and can legally do
so (see page 114 for more information).
This sign tells you that you must not
overtake alongside a turning truck.

truck or fallen load ahead. Slow down
and drive past carefully when you see
these on the road.

A ‘Long Vehicle’ sign is displayed on a
truck that is much longer than normal.
It will take longer to overtake, and will
need extra room to safely stop behind
you. Make sure you can see the entire
front of the truck and a little space
around it in your rear vision mirror
before you pull in after you overtake.

Portable warning triangles

Tip
Pilot Vehicle

Blind spots are increased when
the truck is turning and the chance
of damage to your vehicle, injury or
death is increased. Stay where you
can be seen so you can be safe.

VicRoads Transport Safety Vehicle

Reflective portable warning triangles
warn drivers that there is a broken down

Sharing the road with animals

Farm animals on roads

Each year there are a number of serious
crashes involving kangaroos, horses
and other farm animals.

A Give Way To Stock sign may be
displayed on country roads to enable
stock such as cows or sheep to move
across or along the road.

Horses
Slow down and watch out for horses
being led or ridden on the road – leave
as much space as possible to allow
for unexpected movements by the
horse. Never use your car horn around
horses – it may startle even the most
placid horse and could cause it to bolt
resulting in a crash.

Warning signs are also displayed on
the approaches to permanent stock
crossings. When a Give Way To Stock
sign is displayed, you must travel at a
safe speed that will enable you to slow
down or stop to avoid a collision with
an animal either at or near the sign or
within the distance shown on the sign.

When a Stop sign is displayed at a
stock crossing, you must stop before
reaching the crossing and must not
proceed until all animals have crossed
the road.

Look and listen for trains when there is
a crossing ahead. Even if you think you
know when trains usually pass by, the
train schedule can change at any time,
without notice, so you need to always
check for trains as you approach a
railway level crossing. Drive slowly, at
a speed which will allow you to stop if
necessary. However, if there is a Stop
sign, you must stop.
The following information also applies
to tram level crossings. Obey the tram
level crossing signs.
Gates, booms and flashing lights

Where there are gates, booms, or
flashing lights at railway level crossings,
you must not cross until signals have
stopped flashing and the gates or
booms are fully open.

Keep clear of the train tracks
If there is traffic stopped on the other
side of the railway crossing, you must
not enter the crossing unless there is
room for your vehicle on the other side –
otherwise you could be stuck on the
tracks in the path of an oncoming train.
At some level crossings Yellow Box
Markings painted on the road define the
crossing area. You must not stop on the
painted area.
Trains need long stopping distances
because they are heavy, so the train will
be unable to stop in time regardless of
what or who is stuck on the crossing.
Where there are no gates, booms or
flashing lights

Railway and tramway level crossings

At some railway level crossings,
particularly in the country, where there
are no gates, booms or flashing lights,

take extra care. Slow down. Look
and listen for trains in both directions.
Usually there are warning signs placed
well in advance of these crossings.

Following other signs or
directions

Railway level crossings

There may be other signs you must
obey at railway level crossings.
These are usually either Give Way
or Stop signs.
You should also stop if a railway
employee signals you to stop.

Look both ways for trains
If you have stopped for a train, don’t
move off until you have checked that
another train is not following or coming
the other way.

Parking

Angle parking

Parking is not as easy as it seems.
So that you don’t cause problems for
others or risk parking fines, you need
to observe and interpret many types
of parking signs.

Fact
A person must not cause a
hazard to any person or vehicle
by opening a door of a vehicle,
leaving a door of a vehicle open,
or exiting a vehicle.

Parallel parking
Figure 82 is the usual way to park
unless signs tell you otherwise. You
must park completely within the parking
bay, in line with and close to the kerb.

less than
3 metres

You must park at the angle indicated
by the signs or marked bays. Where no
angle is indicated by signs or marked
bays, you must park at a 45° angle.

more
than
1 metre
more than
3 metres

fig 82.

If parking bays are not marked, you
must:
• leave one metre between you and
the vehicles in front and behind
• park with your vehicle facing the
direction of travel of vehicles next
to where your vehicle is parked
• not unreasonably obstruct the path
of other vehicles or pedestrians.

fig 83.

You must drive in forwards and drive
out forwards. Do not reverse out of
these spots, unless a sign indicates
you may do so.

fig 84.

Parking signs tell you whether or not
you can park, for how long, during
which hours, and if you have to pay.
Some parking signs provide more
details than others. You must not park
continuously in the area to which the
sign applies, for longer than indicated
on a sign.

General parking signs – arrows may
indicate to which length of road the sign
applies, or area parking signs may apply
to the whole parking area.
A sign with only the letter ‘P’ means
you can park without a time limit.
Any number next to the ‘P’ indicates
the amount of time you can park. For
example, the sign below left indicates
a five minute parking limit, whilst the
sign on the right shows a one hour limit.

Centre of road parking

The parking limits apply during the
periods shown on the sign. For example,
the five minute parking sign on the left
means that parking is allowed for a five
minute period between the hours of
9 am and 4 pm from Monday to Friday.
Outside that time period parking is
allowed with no restrictions.

The 1P sign on the right indicates a
one hour time limit during the hours of
9 am to 12 noon on Saturdays. At any
other time you are free to park in that
area with no restrictions.
Meter parking
An individual parking meter next to
your vehicle means you must pay as
instructed on the parking sign or meter.
A group meter for the parking area
nearby means you must purchase a
ticket. Follow the instructions on the
meter or sign. Some group meters print
out a ticket you must display on your
dashboard.
Other group meters require your parking
bay number (marked on the road) and
electronically record your fee paid and
time allowed.

All meters are checked regularly by
parking inspectors.

Tip
When you park beside the road
look out for other road users,
including bicycle riders and
motorcyclists, before opening your
car door. Look out for all other
road users before you drive out
of your parking space.

Parking bays with this sign or ones
that are indicated by a road marking
have been set aside to allow disabled
persons easy access to places such
as shops, libraries or community
centres. You must not park in these
reserved parking spots without a valid
disabled permit.

Electric-powered vehicle parking
Parking bays with this sign must only be
used by electric-powered vehicles and
the vehicle must be plugged in to an
external source of electricity.

Parking for people with disabilities

Where not to park

Clearways

You are allowed two minutes in a
‘No Parking’ area only if you remain
within three metres of the vehicle and
you are picking up or dropping off
passengers or goods. Otherwise, if
you stop, you are considered to have
parked, even if you stay in the vehicle.

Clearways help traffic move faster
during peak times.

These signs tell you that you must not
stop at the kerb for any reason.
Yellow edge lines are sometimes used
instead of ‘No Stopping’ signs. A driver
must not stop next to a continuous
yellow edge line.

Clearway sign used at start of clearway

This sign is used within the clearway

On the signs the letter ‘C’ means
clearway – you must not stop here for
any reason during the hours and days
noted on the sign.

Unless another limit is specified on
the sign, a loading zone is only for
vehicles recorded by VicRoads as
goods-carrying vehicles, signed
delivery and courier vehicles, trucks
while dropping off or picking up goods,
and public passenger vehicles or taxis
that are dropping off or picking up
passengers (30 minute limit or as
shown on the sign).
Other drivers must not stop in a loading
zone (even if loading or unloading).

A Truck Zone is only for trucks with a
gross vehicle mass over 4.5 tonnes. No
time limit is applied for a truck loading or
unloading goods.

Only for public buses.

Only for vehicles displaying a valid
permit for that zone issued by the
relevant authority.

Only for vehicles engaged in
construction work in or near the zone.

Fact

Only for taxis.

Stopping and parking regulations
apply even if you have stopped
or parked your car and have
your hazard warning lights on. If
signs say it is illegal for you to be
stopping or parking at a place,
having your hazard warning lights
on will not change this.

A tow away zone means your vehicle will
be towed away if you park at this spot
during the times specified. Not only do
you pay a parking fine, you also need to
pay a fee to reclaim your car.
General stopping and parking rules
You must not leave a vehicle stationary:
• double parked
• where there is a Keep Clear road
marking
• within an intersection (except on
the continuous side of a continuing
road of a T-intersection)

• on freeways (except in an
emergency stopping lane)
• across a lane or private driveway
• where you would leave less than
three metres of road clear for traffic
• on the wrong side of the road, i.e. on
the far right side of a two-way road
• on a footpath, nature strip, dividing
strip or median strip (unless the
vehicle is a motorcycle or bicycle)
• in a bus lane
• half in, half out of a No Parking or
No Stopping area
• opposite a dividing strip, continuous
single line, or any combination
of continuous or broken double
lines, unless there is at least three
metres of clearance between your
vehicle and the dividing line (unless
otherwise indicated on a parking
sign).

• on a curve or crest outside a
built-up area unless visible for
100 metres from behind, or unless
signs allow
• next to a continuous yellow edge
line
• in a slip lane (unless permitted
by a sign)
• within 20 metres (unless permitted
by a sign) of:
–
–
–
–
–

–

Tow away zones

both sides of an intersection with
traffic lights
the approach side of a bus stop
the approach side of a children’s
crossing
both sides of a level crossing
the approach side of a
pedestrian crossing that is not
at an intersection
the approach side of a tram
stop sign (unless permitted by
a sign)

• within 10 metres (unless permitted
by a sign) of:
–
–
–
–
–

–

an intersection without traffic
lights
the departure side of a bus
stop sign
both sides of a safety zone
the approach side of traffic
lights not at an intersection
the departure side of a
pedestrian crossing that is
not at an intersection
the departure side of a
children’s crossing

• within three metres of an Australia
Post mail box
• within three metres of the departure
side of a crossing with traffic lights
not at an intersection
• within one metre of a fire hydrant.

Penalties
All traffic offences will result in some
type of penalty.
These include monetary fines, loss of
your learner permit or licence, or you
may be taken to court.
Many offences also attract demerit
points.
In serious cases prison sentences may
be imposed.
Remember that a good driving record
is required to progress through the
Graduated Licensing System. A good
driving record means you avoid having
your licence cancelled or suspended,
as well as avoid any drink and/or drug
driving offences. If you do not have a
good driving record, your probationary
period will be extended. If your licence
is cancelled you will need to start your
probationary period again.

A licence or learner permit may be
suspended or cancelled as a result of:
•
•
•
•
•

a court conviction
a Traffic Infringement Notice
accumulation of demerit points
action taken by Fines Victoria
action taken by VicRoads.

If a licence or learner permit is not
held, a person may be disqualified
from obtaining a licence or a learner
permit for a specified period. A
person is not permitted to drive if their
licence or learner permit is suspended
or cancelled by a court, a Traffic
Infringement Notice, Fines Victoria
or by VicRoads. Severe penalties exist
if driving while suspended, unlicensed,
or whilst disqualified.

Suspension
The licence or learner permit is
withdrawn for a specified period. You
cannot drive during this period. In most
cases the original licence or learner
permit is returned. However, if the
suspension has resulted in a change
to the conditions of the licence, a new
licence will need to be issued (see
Penalties for probationary licence
holders on pages 154-155. Probationary
drivers will have their probationary
period extended).

Reissue of the licence or learner permit
may require one or more of the following
actions to be completed:
• knowledge of road law and/or
practical driving test
• an order from a court to be relicensed
• an education course to be completed
• other requirements as specified
by VicRoads (i.e. payment of
licence fee or fitting of an alcohol
interlock device)
• start again on a probationary licence
if the offence was committed whilst
on a probationary licence.

Disqualification

Cancellation

Permission to drive or to apply for a driver
licence or learner permit is withdrawn as
a result of a cancellation or suspension.

A licence or learner permit that is
cancelled is no longer valid. You cannot
drive. Once the period of cancellation
is over, you will need to apply to have
your licence or learner permit reissued
before you can start driving again.

Your vehicle may be impounded for
serious traffic offences. These include
dangerous driving, careless driving,
failure to have proper control of the
vehicle, burnouts, doughnuts and

Impoundment

causing the vehicle to make excessive
noise or smoke. A vehicle may also be
impounded for offences such as:
• speeding at 45 km/h or more over
the limit
• street racing
• repeat offences of unlicensed,
disqualified, drink and/or drug driving.
If you commit a vehicle impoundment
offence, you may have your vehicle
impounded for the following periods:
• first offence - 30 days by police
• second offence – 30 days by police,
plus an additional 45 days to 3
months as imposed by the courts
• more serious offences such as
driving 70 km/h or more over the
limit, repeat disqualified, unlicensed,
drink or drug driving – 30 days by
police, plus an additional 45 days to
3 months as imposed by the courts
• third offence - 30 days by police,
plus an additional 45 days to 3
months as imposed by the courts
or possible vehicle forfeiture as
imposed by the courts.

The following provides a summary of
the actions that may arise from a traffic
offence. Contact VicRoads for further
information.

Imprisonment
In some cases, a court may impose a jail
term as well as a monetary fine.

Infringements Court
The role of the Infringements Court
is to administratively resolve unpaid
infringement notices. These offences
generally have fixed penalties and include
parking offences and driving offences.

Fines Victoria
Fines Victoria will administer a new model
for collecting and enforcing infringements
and court fines in Victoria. The new model
will make it simpler for people to deal
with their fines and will become the single,
central point-of-contact for individuals with
outstanding fines.

As directed by Fines Victoria, sanctions
will be applied on a customer’s registration,
licence or vehicle status. These sanctions
will include individual registration or licence
suspensions, not renewing registrations
or licences, not granting a registration or
licence, not allowing individuals to drive
other vehicles, not enabling individuals

to replace or change number plates on
vehicles, and cancelling the registration
of company vehicles.

Demerit points
Demerit points are one type of penalty that
will be recorded against your driver licence
or learner permit when you commit certain
traffic offences anywhere in Australia.
Demerit points vary in number depending
on the severity of the offence.
Learner and probationary drivers who
incur five or more demerit points in any
twelve month period, or twelve or more
points in any three year period, may have
their licence suspended for three months
or more.
If your licence is not suspended because
you choose a twelve month extended
demerit point period, any further demerit
points would lead to at least a six months
licence suspension. This gives drivers the
opportunity to learn from their mistakes,
but makes licence loss a reality for
persistent offenders.

Further information and a full list of
offences and demerit points can be found
at the VicRoads website at
vicroads.vic.gov.au.

Penalties for learner permit holders
If a learner permit is cancelled or
suspended, it may affect the permit
holder’s eligibility to apply for a licence,
as a learner permit must be held for
a continuous period of 12 months
immediately before applying for a licence,
for those under 21 years of age.
For those who are 21 but under 25 years
the period is six months, and it is three
months if you are 25 years or over.

If your probationary licence is suspended,
your probationary period will be extended.
If your probationary licence is cancelled,
your probationary period will start again,
no matter how close you were to
graduating to the next stage.

Penalties for full licence holders
When a full licence is cancelled, a full
licence will be reissued when all relicensing
requirements have been met. If a court
order is required to be produced due to
an alcohol or drug driving offence, then
a three year zero BAC restriction will be
imposed on the licence when it is reissued
– the inclusion of an alcohol interlock device
may be a condition of the restrictions.

Legal responsibilities
As the holder of a licence or learner
permit, there are a number of additional
legal responsibilities you must fulfil.

Carry your licence
You must carry your probationary
licence or licence receipt whenever you
drive. If you are under 26 years of age
you must carry your licence at all times
when driving. All learner drivers must
also carry their learner permit or learner
permit receipt at all times when driving.

Change of name
You must notify VicRoads within 14 days
when your name has changed. This can
only be done in person at any VicRoads
Customer Service Centre. It must
be supported by original documents
along with either a photo licence or
documents that prove your identity.

The following documents are
acceptable for a change of name:
• marriage certificate (issued by
a Registrar of Births, Deaths and
Marriages in Australia)
• divorce papers
• deed poll (pre 1 November 1986
in Victoria)
• change of name registration
(after 1 November 1986 in Victoria)
• guardianship order
• adoption paper
• birth certificate (issued after
26 June 2000 in Victoria showing
the change of name details
on the back of the certificate).
Commemorative birth certificates
are not acceptable.

Penalties for probationary
licence holders

Change of address or
contact details
You must notify VicRoads within 14 days
if your residential or postal address,
mobile phone number or email has
changed.
Change your details:
• online with a myVicRoads account
at vicroads.vic.gov.au
• by calling us on 13 11 71
• at any VicRoads Customer
Service Centre.

Notification of a medical
condition or disability
You must notify VicRoads if you are
suffering from any serious (permanent
or long-term) illness, disability, medical
condition or injury (or the effects of
treatment for any of those things) that
may impair your ability to drive safely.

You will need to provide a current
medical report from your treating
medical practitioner that states that you
meet the national medical standards for
fitness to drive and provides details of
your medical condition or disability.
Standard medical or eyesight report
forms are available from any VicRoads
Customer Service Centre or by calling
VicRoads. These forms are also
available on VicRoads website.

Replacing a lost or stolen card
Always be careful with your permit and
licence information and keep the card
secure. If your card is lost or stolen
report it to VicRoads immediately and
apply for a replacement. It is important
that you do this as your lost or stolen
card could be used to create
a fraudulent identity.
If you want more information on
preventing and responding to identity
fraud this can be found at
crimeprevention.gov.au.

Air and noise pollution
You must ensure any vehicle you drive
meets relevant air and noise emission
standards. Drivers of offending vehicles
may be fined or taken to court and the
owner may be issued with a notice to
repair the vehicle.

Hoon driving
Police can impound or immobilise
motor vehicles for 30 days if used for
offences such as excessive speeding,
and for improper use of a motor vehicle,
causing loss of traction or excessive
noise or smoke. See impoundment
page 153.

Fact
Registration and roadworthiness
You must not drive a motor vehicle
that is unroadworthy or without
current registration.

Before a long journey
Remember
• Check your fuel, oil, water and
tyre pressures (including the spare)
before a long journey
• Carry a high-visibility vest,
safety markers and a torch
inside your vehicle
• Breakdown lanes are only
for breakdown situations
• Use a rest area for making
social phone calls, toilet stops
or attending to children.

Tips for staying safe in
a breakdown

Breakdown on a freeway
or country road

1. Find a safe spot to pull over such
as an emergency breakdown area.

If you breakdown on a freeway or
country road you should also follow
this advice:

2. Park your vehicle as far to the left
as possible.
3. Always activate your hazard lights.
4. Activate your headlights in poor light.
5. Call roadside assistance on your
mobile phone or use a roadside
emergency phone.
6. When leaving your vehicle always
check for traffic.

• Do not change a tyre yourself,
wait for roadside assistance
• Stay calm, help may take longer
to arrive on a country road
• Let roadside assistance come
to your vehicle and follow their
instructions.

If you see a breakdown

8. Avoid crossing the road at all times.

• Slow down to about 30 km/h
below the posted speed limit
• Avoid crossing the road if you
are helping someone.

9. Stand clear of the road. Move behind
a safety barrier if possible.

(Text derived from Transport for NSW
glove box ‘Breakdown Safety Guide’.)

7. Leave your vehicle from the
passenger side if possible.

Breakdown safety

10. Stay in your vehicle with your
seatbelt on if it’s not safe to leave.

Crash responsibilities

What you must do after a crash

If you are involved in a crash causing
death or injury and do not stop and
give assistance, you can be fined over
$140,000 and/or be imprisoned for
up to 10 years. You will also lose your
licence for at least two years. If you are
involved in a crash there are certain
things you must do immediately after
the crash.

• Stop immediately
• Give assistance to any injured
person
• Provide your name, address,
registration number details and the
vehicle owner’s name to the other
parties involved in the crash, or their
representative, and to the police (if
in attendance)
• If anyone is injured and the police
are not in attendance, you must
report the crash to the nearest
open police station
• If there is any property damage and
the owner (or Police) is not present,
you must report the crash to the
nearest open police station.
There are other things you should do at
a crash scene to prevent other people
getting hurt, and to help those people
involved in the crash (see First aid after
a crash on this page).

There are emergency phones on the
side of the road on most freeways
throughout Victoria. These are called
VicRoads ‘Help Phones’ and can
be used 24 hours a day for vehicle
breakdowns or any other kind of
emergency. The phones are directly
linked to the VicRoads Traffic
Management Centre.

Tip
To call an ambulance, police or
fire brigade, phone 000. To call a
tow truck, phone 13 11 76.
First aid after a crash
The following first aid information is
based on current Red Cross teaching
in line with Australian Resuscitation
Council guidelines.
These guidelines are intended to provide
basic principles to assist at a crash site
and/or attempt resuscitation.

Read these simple instructions now
and keep this handbook in your car.
Someone else may use it to help you
in an accident.

Applying first aid after a crash

If you are at a crash site, try to
remain calm and...

Many of us may need treatment after
a road crash at some stage of our
lives. Whether or not we survive until
trained help arrives may well depend on
somebody’s willingness to give first aid.
Three actions that could save a life
1. Keep a person’s airway open
and clear
2. Make sure that they are
breathing
3. Stop heavy bleeding.

• act quickly
• if necessary, call for an
ambulance, or send someone
to call for one
• ask if there is anybody trained
in first aid at the crash site and
if not, and you are first on the
crash scene, follow these steps.

Fact
Four ways you can help casualties
after a crash:
1. Survey the scene
2. Make the crash scene safe and
protect the area
3. Check the casualties – check
airway, breathing and signs of life

To learn basic first aid such as CPR
(Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation) you
will need to undertake an appropriate
course.

4. Stop the heavy bleeding.

1. Survey the scene
• Is the area safe for you to
approach?
• Ask bystanders to help make the
area safe
• Count the number of people who
are injured
• Call an ambulance (dial 000) or
send someone to call one
• Ask if there is anybody trained in
first aid at the crash site.

2. Make the crash scene safe
and protect the area

If the person seems to be
unconscious:

–

• Position your car with its hazard
lights flashing, to warn other
motorists, or use headlights to
light up the scene if necessary
• Send someone down the road to
warn approaching traffic, and turn
off the ignition in damaged vehicles.

• Gently touch the casualty on the
shoulder, give a simple command
e.g. ‘squeeze my hands’ to see if
they can respond.

–

3. Check the casualties

If they do not respond:
• Check airway.
–

Is the person conscious?
• For conscious casualties:
–
–
–

Talk to the casualty, tell them
your name and reassure them
Treat any injuries
Check for and control any
heavy bleeding (see Stop heavy
bleeding on page 161).

–

Open the casualty’s mouth
and check for any loose or
obstructive objects e.g. loose
dentures, vomit, blood etc., and
clear from the airway
If the airway is clear, open the
airway by gently tilting the head
back, and check for breathing.

• Check breathing.
–
–
–

–

Look for the rise and fall of
the chest
Listen for breathing
Feel for the casualty’s breath
on your cheek.

Continue to maintain an open
airway
If the casualty is not breathing
begin cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (see page 161)
Check for signs of life
(movement, breathing,
colour, etc.).

For conscious, breathing
casualties still in the vehicle:
• If you are certain that the vehicle
and surrounds are safe, and the
casualty is either conscious and/
or breathing, they do not have to
be unnecessarily removed until
specialist help arrives, unless
circumstances arise, such as:
–
–
–

They stop breathing
Their condition worsens
It is no longer safe for them
to stay in the vehicle.

If a casualty inside or outside a
vehicle must be moved to escape
danger, or for you to give CPR, do
so carefully and gently because
of the risk of spinal injury or
increased bleeding.

For unconscious, breathing
casualties outside the vehicle:
• Keep a close eye on them to make
sure their airway is clear and they
are still breathing, whilst waiting for
the ambulance to arrive
• If the casualty is lying on the
ground, it is vital to keep them on
their side in a stable position with
their head tilted back and face
pointed down in order to maintain
an open airway.

For casualties unconscious and
NOT breathing:
Even if the casualty is injured, you will
need to remove them from the vehicle
to perform these steps.

Cardiopulmonary (CPR)
resuscitation
With the casualty on their back, check
the airway
1. Tilt the head back fully to open
the airway
2. Cover the casualty’s mouth with
your mouth blocking their nose
with your cheek
3. Breathe into the casualty until
the chest begins to rise
4. Remove your mouth (make sure
the chest falls)
5. Give another normal breath

6. Check to see if the casualty is now
breathing by watching for chest
rise and fall, whilst at the same
time, checking for signs of life.
If the casualty is still not breathing
7. Begin CPR and continue until
Emergency Services arrive.

Fact

Fact

If performing CPR on children, use
minimal head tilt and small breaths.
For infants, give small puffs and do
NOT use head tilt.

4. Stop heavy bleeding
Heavy bleeding of any type can be
fatal. Heavy external bleeding requires
quick action as follows: To stop external
bleeding do the following tasks:
• Locate where the blood is coming
from
• Apply firm pressure where the
blood is coming from, using

whatever clean cloth is available,
e.g. an item of clothing, to make
a pad
• If possible tie the pad firmly in place
• If possible, raise the injured area.
This may reduce or help to stop
the bleeding.
In an emergency, when gloves are
not available and you have to control
bleeding:
• Ask the casualty to help by applying
pressure or by placing a dressing or
other clean dry cloth between your
hands and the wound.

Fact
Always give first aid care in ways
which protect you and the casualty
from disease transmission.
• Use protective barriers (for
example disposable gloves
or face mask) which are
appropriate to the emergency
• When gloves are not available
and you have to control
bleeding, ask the casualty to
help you by applying pressure,
or placing a dressing or other
clean dry cloth between your
hands and the wound
• Wash your hands thoroughly
as soon as possible after
giving first aid
• Avoid touching or being
splashed by body fluids
where possible.

Assisting victims following
motorcycle crashes
The incidence of spinal injuries, multiple
fractures and loss of skin are much
higher for motorcyclists than those in
other motor vehicle crashes.
Helmets should only be removed if
absolutely necessary.
If a helmet is worn then this should
only be removed when the victim is
unconscious, the airway is blocked,
or airway clearance is uncertain and
likely to be compromised.
This will enable resuscitation to be given.
Wherever possible, two people
should undertake helmet removal –
one to steady the head and neck, and
the other to gently remove the helmet.
The procedure should only be carried
out by a single person if no-one is
available to assist.

Victoria Police

Test yourself questions
The questions you will find in this
section are examples of the type of
questions you will be asked. The actual
test questions are not the ones asked in
this handbook.
(The answers to Test Yourself Questions
are upside down at the bottom of the
next page).

Q2 If the police stop you at a
random breath test station, you
must take a breath test:
A when you are asked to do so
B only if you have been drinking
C only if you have been speeding

Q3 Driving can best be described
as:

Q1 In good conditions, a safe
following distance is:

A an easy task that just about everyone
can do

A at least 1 second behind the car
in front

B a task which most people can learn
after a few lessons over several
weeks

B at least two seconds behind the
car in front
C at least two car lengths from the
car in front

C a complicated task

Q4 Supervised learner drivers:
A are more at risk of being involved
in a crash causing injury than
probationary drivers
B have the same risk of being involved
in a crash causing injury as do
probationary drivers
C are amongst the safest drivers on
the road

Q5 Are your responsibilities the
same for a school crossing as for
a pedestrian crossing?
A Yes, in both cases you may drive on
after giving way to pedestrians
B No, at a children’s crossing you
must stop and remain stopped until
the crossing is completely clear of
pedestrians
C No, at a children’s crossing you have
to give way only to children

B looking quickly over your shoulder
to look out the side windows
C a place behind the driver that can’t
be seen by using the mirrors

Q7 In the early stages of learning
to drive, it is best to take:
A frequent, short drives in light traffic
with your supervising driver
B the occasional long drive with your
supervising driver
C regular drives with your supervising
driver in heavy traffic

A 6-8 months of solo driving
experience
B 1 year of solo driving experience
C 2-3 years of solo driving experience

Q9 What is the best way to
check the crashworthiness
of a new or used car?
A check the car safety rating at
howsafeisyourcar.com.au
or in the Australasian New Car
Assessment Program or the Buyers
Guide to Used Car Safety Rating
brochures
B ask your parents or a friend
C ask the person you’re buying the
car from

Answers: Q1 B, Q2 A, Q3 C, Q4 C,
Q5 B, Q6 B, Q7 A, Q8 C, Q9 A

A making eye contact with other road
users so that you know they have
seen you

Q8 The likelihood of a crash
is almost halved after:

Q6 A head check is:

Resources to help you

Legislation

All registration and licensing enquiries
and test bookings.

The Road Safety Act 1986, the
Road Safety Road Rules 2009 and
associated Regulations can be viewed
at legislation.vic.gov.au.

Monday to Friday 8.30 am – 5.00 pm
Saturday 8.30 am – 2.00 pm

The Road Rules - Victoria can be
viewed on VicRoads website.

• there is money owing on the vehicle
• the vehicle is recorded as stolen.

Victoria Police

For a small fee, you can also obtain a
Personal Property Securities Search
certificate at ppsr.gov.au which
includes these details.

VicRoads telephone enquiries

Tel: 13 11 71
International calls: +61 3 9854 7763
(registration and licensing)
+61 3 9854 2666 (general enquiries)
TTY: 13 36 77
Speak and Listen: 1300 555 727

For information and assistance with
road law issues. Tel: (03) 9247 5779 or
visit police.vic.gov.au

VicRoads Traffic
Management Centre

VicRoads website

This Centre provides information about:

VicRoads website provides many
online services and information about
VicRoads services, products and
strategies. vicroads.vic.gov.au.

•
•
•
•

emergency road conditions
freeway breakdowns
traffic accident reports
traffic light faults.

Tel: 13 11 70

Personal Property
Securities Register
If you are thinking about buying a
second hand vehicle privately, you
should check whether:

Tel: 1300 007 777

Vehicle Registration Enquiry
Service
You can check registration status for
free at vicroads.vic.gov.au.

CityLink is Melbourne’s fully electronic
toll way. To use CityLink, you’ll need
an e-TAG, Day Pass or Tulla Pass.
Call CityLink to arrange your e-TAG
or Day Pass, or visit the website at
citylink.com.au or call 13 26 29.

CityLink

EastLink
EastLink (M3) is the 39 km fully
electronic tollway from the end of
the Eastern Freeway at Mitcham to
Frankston. To use EastLink, you need
a tag, non-tag account or EastLink
trip pass. If you already have a tag it
will work. To open a Breeze account
or buy a trip pass, visit breeze.com.au
or call 13 LINK (13 54 65).

Index

A
accompanying driver 15, 20
air and noise pollution 156
airbags 59, 78
alcohol and drugs 5, 51
animals 79, 82, 144
assessment 26-27
automatic transmission 20, 23

buses 62, 64, 71, 94-95, 99, 123, 125,
137-138, 140-141, 150
bus stops 134, 136, 151-152

B
BAC (blood alcohol concentration)
15, 22-23, 26, 51, 71-74, 155
bicycle riders 39, 64, 95-96, 99, 107-108,
113, 115, 119, 125-126, 131, 136-137, 148
blind spots 40, 137, 141, 143
bookings 10, 17, 166
– learner permit 8-10, 25
– licence 16-17
brakes and braking 45-46, 59, 67, 127
breakdowns 158, 166
breath testing 74
built-up areas 79-80, 141, 151

see also child restraints

C
caravans 22, 26-27
child restraints 24, 58, 78-79
children 58, 78-79, 80, 89, 101, 131-132,
135-136, 151-152, 161
CityLink 167
clearways 149
conditions, driving 19-20, 32, 35, 39, 44,
64-65, 76, 81, 124, 128-129, 136
continuous period (learner permit)
16, 154
country roads 32, 64, 80, 82, 144-145
crashes 5, 30-31, 34, 52, 57-59, 63, 73,
76-77, 98, 124, 137-138, 144
– responsibilities 98, 158-162
– risk reduction 50-57

D
demerit points 5, 21, 23, 56, 58, 60, 74,
77, 152, 154
disabled persons 148
divided roads 65, 87, 109, 125
dividing lines 91-92, 151
driver eligibility
see permit holder’s eligibility

Drive Test 14, 16, 18-20, 44, 47
driving hours
– instructor 18, 20, 43, 71
– log book 5, 13-14, 16-18, 43-44
drugs 5, 50-51, 73, 75-77
see also alcohol and drugs; medicines

dual control 20
E
EastLink 167
emergency signals 129
emergency vehicles 23, 141
eyesight tests 11, 18, 26-27, 57, 156

G
Give Way rules 100-111, 119
Give Way signs 85, 97, 99, 101-102, 133
Graduated Licensing System 5, 26-28, 31,

H
hazard lights 124, 129, 160
hazard perception 7, 19, 39, 62
see also potential hazard

Hazard Perception Test 7, 9, 16,
18-19, 25-27
head checks 32, 34, 40-41, 62, 110, 130
headlight range 128
headlights 65, 124, 128, 130, 160
– high-beam 128
heavy vehicles 62, 114, 130, 141
help phones 158
high powered vehicles

I
identity (evidence of) 11-12, 26-27,
155-156
imprisonment (jail) 152, 154
indicators 32, 64, 112, 124, 126-127,
129‑130
interpreters 25
intersections 32, 34-35, 55, 64-65,
85-87, 96-109, 114-115, 119-120, 125, 127,
131-132, 135, 137, 143, 151-152
Infringements Court 154

Index

F
fatigue 50, 57
fines 54, 56, 58, 60, 75, 77, 146, 151-152,
154, 156, 158
Fines Victoria 152, 154
first aid 158-159, 162
following distance 35, 61-62, 125
freeways 32, 60, 80, 97, 110, 122-123, 151,
158, 166-167
full licence 7-8, 22-23, 25, 28, 71, 74, 155

K
keeping to the left 126

see probationary prohibited vehicles

hoon driving 153, 156
horn 46, 65, 129, 135, 144
horses
see animals

Index
L
L plates 15, 18, 26-27
lanes 32, 35, 40, 45, 62, 64-65, 81, 87,
93-96, 100, 107, 110-113, 122-127, 131, 137,
139-140, 141, 143
– bicycle 94-96, 99, 101-102, 108, 113,
115, 131-132, 135-137
– bus 94-95, 123, 141, 150-151
– changing 32, 40, 64, 93, 110-111,
125‑127, 137, 140, 142
– emergency 54
– overhead lane signals 93
– tram 94, 138-140
– transit 94-95, 123
language options 9, 25
learner permit 5, 7-8, 10-13, 15-16, 18,
25‑28, 41, 43, 74-75, 152-155

legal responsibilities 155
level crossings
– railway 80, 89, 145
– tram 145
licence
– full driver 7-8, 22-25, 28, 71, 74, 155
– probationary 5, 7-9, 11-18, 20-28, 31,
41, 47, 53, 74-75, 152-155
– steps 8-28
lights
– brake 127
– flashing 124, 141-142, 145
– hazard 124, 160
– head 65, 124, 128, 130, 160
– high-beam 128
– rear fog 81, 129
– tail 128
traffic see traffic lights

M
median strip 109-110, 112, 122
medical illness/disability 11, 18, 76, 156
medicines 51, 57, 75-77
merging 32, 40, 110, 142
see also zip merging

mirrors 32, 40-41, 45, 62-63, 130, 137,
141-143
mobile phones 15, 22-23, 32, 50, 53-55
motorcyclists 64, 107, 125, 136-137, 162
N
name change 155
night driving 32, 63
O
overtaking 40, 65, 85, 91-92, 94, 100, 114,
123-127, 130-131, 137, 139-143

R
railway level crossings
see level crossings

restraint fitting stations 78
reversing 40, 46, 121
road markings 91-97, 113, 130-131,
145, 148
road rage 65-66, 126
road work signs 90
roundabouts 107, 119, 143
rules and regulations 70, 166

S
safety margin 61-62, 140, 142
safety zones 84, 134-135, 152
scanning 45, 52
school zone speed limits 80
seatbelts 58, 77-79
shared zones 81, 101, 134
signalling see indicators
signs
– advisory speed 88
– clearway 149
– direction 84, 90
– electronic advisory 122-123
– give way 85, 97, 99, 101-102,
109, 133
– intersection (signs) 85-87, 99, 107
– railway level crossings 89, 145
– road works 90
– roundabouts 87, 107, 119
– speed 79-81, 88
– stop 85, 87, 97, 99, 101-102, 109, 132,
135, 144-145, 151-152
– tow away 151
– truck 142-143, 149-150

Index

P
P plates 8, 20-31, 60
parking 65, 92, 95, 112, 126-127,
146-151, 154
– disabled 148
– meter 148
– signs 147-151
passenger restriction 23, 26, 73
pedestrians 32, 39, 56, 60, 64, 72,
80-81, 84, 89, 99-101, 105, 109, 116,
125‑126, 129, 131-136, 138, 146,
151-152
– crossings 100, 131, 134-135, 151-152
– signals 99
penalties 17, 21, 51, 74-75, 77, 152-155
permit holder’s eligibility 10, 12, 26-27, 154
photographs 12-13, 21, 25
police 74-75, 111, 141, 153, 156, 158,
potential hazard 19, 32, 34, 39-40, 43,
45‑46, 60, 62-63, 75
power nap 57
probationary licence 7, 16-18, 20-28,
30‑31, 53, 74-75, 152-155
Probationary prohibited vehicles 22-24, 26

Index
– warning 86-90, 144-145
– zones 80, 123
skidding 82-83
slip lanes 100, 103, 113
special purpose lanes 94
speed 35, 52, 60, 63, 67, 79-83, 122-126,
153, 156
speed control 46
speed limits 79-83, 93, 123-124, 134, 136
stopping
– distance 82-83, 145
see also braking distance

supervising drivers 1, 13-14, 16, 18, 23,
31‑32, 42-44, 46-47, 54, 63, 71, 165
T
tail lights 128
taxis 71, 79, 95 ,123, 149-150
test
– Drive Test 5, 7, 14, 19-20, 25-27, 44
– Hazard Perception Test 7, 9, 16,
18-19, 25-27
– learner permit 5, 7, 9-12, 25-27, 43, 166
– licence 5, 11-28, 41, 47, 153-155, 166

– probationary licence 7, 9, 11, 13-20,
25-27, 41, 166
test yourself questions 164-165
three point turn 121
T-intersections 87, 103, 105-106
tiredness
see fatigue

tollways 123, 167
traffic islands 96-97, 100, 134
traffic lane arrows 96
traffic lights 87, 96, 98-99, 103-105, 115,
122, 132-133, 141, 166
trailer 15, 26-27, 62
tram level crossings
see level crossings

tram stops 101, 125, 134-135, 138-139
trams 32, 62, 64, 94-95, 99, 101, 107,
134‑135, 138-140
transit lanes 94-95, 123
TTY (Telephone Typewriter) 10, 166
tunnel 124
turns and turning
– hook 114-115

– left 84, 113, 119
– right 34-35, 112-115, 117, 119-120
– roundabouts 32, 87, 107-108,
119-120, 143
– U-turns 91-92, 109, 116-117, 126-127,
130, 141
tramways 140
trucks 62, 64, 114, 125, 137, 141-143,
149‑150
tyres 59, 67, 83
U
U-turns 91-92, 109, 116-117, 126-127, 130,
V
vehicles (definition) 102
vehicle impoundment 153
vision impaired 136
W
weather conditions 39, 44, 60, 81,
128-129, 136
Z
zero BAC 15, 22-23, 26-27, 51, 71-74, 155
see also BAC

Customer Service Centres
For VicRoads Customer Service Centre locations and
further information please visit vicroads.vic.gov.au
or call 13 11 71

DOT0001

VRPIN00568 04.23

98343

vicroads.vic.gov.au
